                                                                                                                            arXiv:0708.1270


                                            Black Hole Entropy Function, Attractors and Precision
                                                          Counting of Microstates
arXiv:0708.1270v4 [hep-th] 5 Nov 2009




                                                                                   Ashoke Sen

                                                                  Harish-Chandra Research Institute
                                                            Chhatnag Road, Jhusi, Allahabad 211019, INDIA
                                                               E-mail: sen@mri.ernet.in, ashokesen1999@gmail.com


                                                                                     Abstract

                                            In these lecture notes we describe recent progress in our understanding of attractor mechanism
                                        and entropy of extremal black holes based on the entropy function formalism. We also describe precise
                                        computation of the microscopic degeneracy of a class of quarter BPS dyons in N = 4 supersymmetric
                                        string theories, and compare the statistical entropy of these dyons, expanded in inverse powers of
                                        electric and magnetic charges, with a similar expansion of the corresponding black hole entropy. This
                                        comparison is extended to include the contribution to the entropy from multi-centered black holes
                                        as well.




                                                                                         1
Contents
1 Motivation                                                                                             3

2 Black Hole Entropy Function and the Attractor Mechanism                                                8
  2.1 Definition of extremal black holes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       8
   2.2   Spherically symmetric black holes in D = 4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      11
   2.3   Attractor, field redefinition and duality transformation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      17
   2.4   Spherically symmetric black holes for arbitrary D . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       18
   2.5   Rotating black holes in D = 4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     21
   2.6   Dealing with Chern-Simons terms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       28

3 Explicit Computation of Black Hole Entropy                                                             35
   3.1   Black holes in N = 4 supersymmetric theories in D = 4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         35
         3.1.1 Supergravity approximation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        36
         3.1.2   A special class of N = 4 supersymmetric string theories . . . . . . . . . . . . .       40
         3.1.3   Duality symmetries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    43
         3.1.4 Corrections due to Gauss-Bonnet terms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         45
         3.1.5 Non-supersymmetric extremal black holes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           49
   3.2   Black holes in N = 2 supersymmetric theories in D = 4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         50
         3.2.1   General considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    50
         3.2.2   S-T-U model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     53
         3.2.3 Non-supersymmetric extremal black holes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           56
   3.3   Small black holes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   57
   3.4   Extremal BTZ black holes with gauge and gravitational Chern-Simons terms . . . . .              62

4 Black Holes with an AdS3 Factor in the Near Horizon Geometry                                   68
  4.1 Origin and consequences of AdS3 factor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
   4.2   Applications to black holes in string theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    73
   4.3   Limitations of AdS3 based approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      75
   4.4   Small black hole revisited . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    78

5 Precision Counting of Dyon States                                                                      78
   5.1   Summary of the results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    79
   5.2   The counting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    87

                                                    2
          5.2.1   Counting states of the Kaluza-Klein monopole . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      89
          5.2.2   Counting states associated with the overall motion of the D1-D5 system . . . .        95
          5.2.3 Counting states associated with the relative motion of the D1-D5 system . . . 105
          5.2.4 The full partition function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108
    5.3   Additional charges from collective modes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110
    5.4   Walls of marginal stability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 121
    5.5   Duality transformation of the degeneracy formula . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 125
    5.6   The statistical entropy function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 130
    5.7   Jump in degeneracy and two centered black holes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 143

6 Open Questions and Speculation on N = 2                                                             148

A The Sign Conventions                                                                                152

B A Class of (4,4) Superconformal Field Theories                                                      153

C Siegel Modular Forms from Threshold Integrals                                                       159

                      e
D Zeroes and Poles of Φ                                                                               164

E The Case of Multiple D5 branes                                                                      169

F Riemann Normal Coordinates and Duality Invariant Statistical Entropy Function172

                                   ~
G The Integration Measure J (~τB , ξ)                                                                 177

H The Coefficient of the Gauss-Bonnet Term in Type IIB on (M × Se1 × S 1 )/ ZZN                       178


1     Motivation
It is well known that low energy limit of string theory gives rise to gravity coupled to other fields.
As a result these theories typically have black hole solutions. Thus string theory gives a framework
for studying classical and quantum properties of black holes.
    Classically black holes are solutions of Einstein’s equations with special properties. They have
a hypothetical surface – known as the event horizon – surrounding them such that no object inside
the event horizon can escape the black hole. In quantum theory however the black hole behaves as


                                                     3
a black body with finite temperature – known as the Hawking temperature. Consequently it emits
Hawking radiation in accordance with the laws of black body radiation, and in its interaction with
matter it behaves as a thermodynamic system characterized by entropy and other thermodynamic
quantities. In the low curvature approximation where we ignore terms in the action with more than
two derivatives, this entropy, known as the Bekenstein-Hawking entropy SBH , is given by a simple
expression
                                          SBH = A/(4GN ) ,                                      (1.1)
where A is the area of the event horizon and GN is the Newton’s constant. One of the important
questions is: Can we understand this entropy from statistical viewpoint ı.e. as logarithm of the
number of quantum states associated with the black hole?
   Although we do not yet have a complete answer to this question, for a special class of black
holes in string theory, – known as extremal black holes, – this question has been answered in the
affirmative. These black holes have zero temperature and hence do not Hawking radiate and are
usually stable. Often, but not always, extremal black holes are also invariant under certain number
of supersymmetry transformations. In that case they are called BPS black holes. Due to the stability
and the supersymmetry properties one has some control over the dynamics of the microscopic config-
uration (typically involving D-branes, fundamental strings and other solitonic objects) representing
these black holes. This in turn allows us to calculate the degeneracy of such states at weak coupling
where gravitational backreaction of the system can be ignored. Supersymmetry allows us to continue
the result to strong coupling where gravitational backreaction becomes important and the system
can be described as a black hole. In string theory one finds that for a wide class of extremal BPS
black holes we have, in the limit where the size of the black hole is large [1],

                                         SBH (Q) = Sstat (Q) ,                                  (1.2)

where SBH (Q) denotes the Bekenstein-Hawking entropy of an extremal black hole carrying a given
set of charges labelled by Q, and Sstat (Q) is defined as

                                          Sstat (Q) = ln d(Q) ,                                 (1.3)

where d(Q) is the degeneracy of BPS states in the theory carrying the same set of charges. This
clearly gives a good understanding of this Bekenstein-Hawking entropy from microscopic viewpoint.
    The initial comparison between SBH and Sstat was carried out in the limit of large charges. Typ-
ically in this limit the horizon size is large so that the curvature and other field strengths at the
horizon are small and hence we can calculate the entropy via eq.(1.1) without worrying about the

                                                    4
higher derivative corrections to the effective action of string theory. On the other hand the compu-
tation of Sstat (Q) also simplifies in this limit since the dynamics of the corresponding microscopic
system is often described by a 1+1 dimensional conformal field theory (CFT) with the spatial coor-
dinate compactified on a circle. An extremal black hole with large charges typically corresponds to
a state of this CFT with large L0 (or L̄0 ) eigenvalue and zero L̄0 (or L0 ) eigenvalue. The degeneracy
of such states can be computed via the Cardy formula in terms of the left- and right-handed central
charges (cL , cR ) of the conformal field theory and the L0 (or L̄0 ) eigenvalue without knowing the
details of the conformal field theory:
                                                  r
                                                  cL L0
                                 Sstat (Q) ≃ 2π              for L̄0 = 0
                                                 r 6
                                                  cR L̄0
                                            ≃ 2π             for L0 = 0 .                            (1.4)
                                                    6
The pleasant surprise is that these two completely different computations, – one for SBH (Q) and the
other for Sstat (Q), – give the same answer.
   Given this success, it is natural to carry out this comparison to finer details. When we move
away from the large charge limit, the curvature and other field strengths at the horizon are no longer
negligible. Thus we must take into account the effect of higher derivative terms in the effective
action on the black hole entropy. Typical example of such higher derivative terms are terms involving
square and higher powers of the Riemann tensor. For a large but finite size black hole we expect
the effect of these higher derivative terms at the horizon to be small but non-zero, giving rise to
small modifications of the horizon geometry and consequently the black hole entropy. On the other
hand for finite but large charges the statistical entropy computed from the Cardy formula will also
receive corrections which are suppressed by inverse powers of charges. Thus it would be natural
to ask: Does the agreement between SBH (Q) and Sstat (Q) continue to hold even after taking into
account the effects of higher derivative corrections on the black hole side, and deviation from the
Cardy formula on the statistical side?
   Due to an inherent ambiguity in defining the black hole entropy and the statistical entropy beyond
the large charge limit, the issue involved is more complex than it sounds. The original Bekenstein-
Hawking entropy was computed in classical general theory of relativity. However once we begin
including higher derivative corrections, various string dualities can map the classical contribution to
the effective action to the quantum contribution and vice versa. Thus it no longer makes sense to
restrict our analysis to the classical theory. A natural choice will be to use the one particle irreducible
(1PI) effective action of the theory since it respects all the duality symmetries. However since string

                                                    5
theory has massless particles, the 1PI effective action typically gets non-local contributions if we go
to sufficiently high order in the derivatives. As we shall describe in this review, while for any higher
derivative theory of gravity with a local Lagrangian density there is a well defined algorithm for
computing the entropy of a black hole, at present no technique is available for treating theories with
non-local action. This causes a potential problem in defining the entropy of a black hole in string
theory beyond the leading order. We could circumvent this problem using the Wilsonian effective
action which is manifestly local, but this does not respect all the duality symmetries of the theory.
There is a similar ambiguity on the statistical side as well. Since the corrections to the entropy
are suppressed by inverse powers of various charges, they can be regarded as finite size corrections.
However such corrections are known to depend crucially on the ensemble we choose to define the
entropy. For example we could use duality invariant microcanonical or grand canonical ensembles,
or use duality non-invariant mixed ensembles where we treat a subset of the charges as we would
do in a microcanonical ensemble and the rest of the charges as we would do in a grand canonical
ensemble [2].
   We hope that by studying explicit examples where one could compute the corrections to both
the statistical entropy and the black hole entropy, we may be able to resolve the above mentioned
ambiguities and make a more precise formulation of the relationship between the two entropies.
In order to proceed along these lines we need to open two fronts. First of all we need to learn
how to take into account the effect of the higher derivative terms on the computation of black hole
entropy. But we also need to know how to calculate the statistical entropy to greater accuracy. This
involves precise computation of the degeneracy of states with a given set of charges. In this review
we shall address both these issues. The first part of the review, dealing with the computation of
black hole entropy in the presence of higher derivative terms, will be based on the entropy function
formalism of [3, 4], – this in turn is an adaptation of a more general formalism for computing black
hole entropy in the presence of higher derivative terms [5] to the special case of extremal black
holes. The second part of the review, dealing with precision computation of statistical entropy for
a class of four dimensional black holes in N = 4 supersymmetric string theories, will follow the
analysis of [6, 7, 8]. The original formula for the statistical entropy was first proposed in [9] for
the special case of heterotic string theory compactified on T 6 , and later extended to more general
models in [10, 11, 12]. Various alternative approaches to proving these formulæ have been explored
in [13, 14, 15, 16, 17]. We shall not review these different approaches, except parts of [13, 15] that
will be directly relevant for our approach to the counting problem, and also part of [18] that will be
useful in extracting the asymptotic behaviour of the statistical entropy for large charges.


                                                   6
    In our analysis we shall try to maintain manifest duality invariance by using the 1PI effective
action on the black hole side and microcanonical ensemble on the statistical side. As we shall see,
to the extent we can compute both sides, the black hole and the statistical entropy agree even after
taking into account higher derivative corrections. The analysis on the statistical side is quite clean,
and we find an explicit algorithm to generate an expansion of the statistical entropy in inverse powers
of charges. The analysis on the black hole side suffers from the inherent problem of having to deal
with non-local terms, but we carry out our analysis by including the effect of a duality invariant set
of local four derivative terms in the action, – the Gauss-Bonnet term. Although we cannot prove
that the other four derivative terms (including non-local terms) do not contribute to this order, we
find that in various limits where this additional contribution can be computed, the result for the
black hole entropy agrees with the one computed using the Gauss-Bonnet term. We believe that the
limitation due to the non-local nature of the 1PI effective action can be overcome in the future, and
we shall find a systematic procedure for calculating the black hole entropy using the 1PI effective
action. On the other hand it is also possible in principle that we can give up manifest duality
invariance and work with Wilsonian effective action on the black hole side and a mixed ensemble on
the statistical side. This approach has been advocated in [2].
    The rest of the review is organised as follows. In §2 we develop the entropy function formalism
for computing the entropy of extremal black holes. We include in this discussion spherically sym-
metric black holes in various dimensions, rotating black holes, theories with Chern-Simons terms
etc., and also describe how the entropy function formalism provides a simple proof of the attractor
phenomenon. §3 contains application of this formalism to the computation of entropy of a wide class
of extremal black holes in a wide class of theories. These include in particular a class of quarter
BPS black holes in the N = 4 supersymmetric four dimensional string theories; these are the black
holes for which we later carry out a detailed comparison between the black hole entropy and the
statistical entropy. In §4 we compare our approach, which holds for a general extremal black hole,
with that of [19, 20, 21, 22] where for a special class of extremal black holes – with an AdS3 factor in
the near horizon geometry – a more powerful technique for computing the entropy was developed.
In §5 we describe the computation of statistical entropy of a special class of black holes in N = 4
supersymmetric string theories in four dimensions, and compare the results with the black hole en-
tropy computed in §3. We conclude in §6 with a list of open questions. We also speculate on how
our degeneracy formula might be extendable to the N = 2 supersymmetric string theories. The
appendices provide us with some technical results which are used mainly in the computation of the
statistical entropy.


                                                   7
   We must caution the reader that this is not a complete review of attractor mechanism or com-
putation of black hole and statistical entropy. Instead it deals with only a very specific approach to
computing entropy of extremal black holes using the entropy function formalism, and computation
of the statistical entropy of a special class of dyons in a special class of theories. It does not even
contain all aspects of the entropy function formalism or the computation of the statistical entropy
in N = 4 supersymmetric string theories. However we have tried to make the review self-contained
in the sense that for the material that does get covered in the review, one does not always have to
go back and consult the original literature in order to follow the material. As a result the review has
become somewhat long; however we hope that this has not significantly increased the time needed
to go through the rest of the review.


2     Black Hole Entropy Function and the Attractor Mecha-
      nism
In this section we shall develop a general method for computing the entropy of extremal black holes
in a theory of gravity with higher derivative corrections. The first question we need to address is:
How do we define extremal black holes in a general higher derivative theory of gravity? For this
we shall take the clue from usual theories of gravity with two derivative actions, – namely study
the properties of extremal black holes in these theories and then identify certain universal features
which can be adopted as the definition of extremal black holes in a more general class of theories
with higher derivative terms.

2.1    Definition of extremal black holes
We begin our analysis with the Reissner-Nordstrom solution describing a spherically symmetric
charged black hole in the usual Einstein-Maxwell theory in four dimensions. This theory is described
by the action               Z     p                        1        1
                       S = d4 x − det g L,         L=           R − Fµν F µν .                (2.1.1)
                                                        16πGN       4
We shall be using the following notations for the Christoffel symbol and Riemann tensors:
                                      1
                                Γµνρ = g µσ (∂ν gσρ + ∂ρ gσν − ∂σ gνρ )
                                      2
                                Rµνρσ = ∂ρ Γµνσ − ∂σ Γµνρ + Γµτρ Γτνσ − Γµτσ Γτνρ
                                Rνσ = Rµνµσ ,        R = g νσ Rνσ .                             (2.1.2)


                                                     8
The Reissner-Nordstrom solution in this theory is given by
                                                             dρ2
             ds2 = −(1 − a/ρ)(1 − b/ρ)dτ 2 +                             + ρ2 (dθ2 + sin2 θdφ2 ) ,
                                                      (1 − a/ρ)(1 − b/ρ)
                       q                  p
             Fρτ =         ,     Fθφ =      sin θ ,                                                   (2.1.3)
                      4πρ2               4π
where ρ, θ, φ and τ are the space-time coordinates, a and b are two constants determined from the
relation
                                                       GN 2
                                a + b = 2GN M,            (q + p2 ) ,
                                                             ab =                            (2.1.4)
                                                       4π
and q, p and M denote the electric and magnetic charges and the mass of the black hole respectively.
If we take a > b then the inner and the outer horizon of the black hole are at r = b and at r = a
respectively. The extremal limit corresponds to choosing
                                                      1
                                         M2 =            (q 2 + p2 ) ,                                (2.1.5)
                                                    4πGN
so that we have                                      r
                                                         GN 2
                                         a=b=               (q + p2 ) .                               (2.1.6)
                                                         4π
We now define
                                    t = λ τ /a2 ,         r = λ−1 (ρ − a),                            (2.1.7)
where λ is an arbitrary constant, and rewrite the extremal solution in this new coordinate system.
This gives
                            r 2 a4        (a + λ r)2 2
                ds2 = −             dt2
                                        +           dr + (a + λ r)2 (dθ2 + sin2 θdφ2 ) ,
                         (a + λ r)2           r2
                            qa2                   p
                Frt   =             ,     Fθφ =     sin θ .                                           (2.1.8)
                        4π(a + λr)2              4π
Finally we take the ‘near horizon’ limit λ → 0. In this limit the solution takes the form:
                                                    
                                                dr 2
                        ds = a −r dt + 2 + a2 (dθ2 + sin2 θdφ2 ) ,
                           2       2     2 2
                                                 r
                                   q               p
                         Frt =       ,     Fθφ =      sin θ .                                         (2.1.9)
                                 4π               4π
The entropy of the black hole, obtained by dividing the area of the horizon by 4GN , is
                                                 1
                                            SBH = (q 2 + p2 ) .                                      (2.1.10)
                                                 4
   The field configuration given in (2.1.9) has the following features:

                                                         9
  1. In the limit λ → 0 keeping r fixed, the original coordinate ρ approaches a. Thus (2.1.9)
     describes the field configuration of the black hole near the horizon.

  2. Since for any λ (2.1.8) describes an exact classical solution, in the λ → 0 limit also we have
     an exact classical solution for all finite r, not just for small r. Indeed, we could have obtained
     (2.1.9) by directly solving the equations of motion of the Einstein-Maxwell theory without any
     reference to black holes.

  3. The space-time described by (2.1.9) splits into a product of two spaces. One of them, labelled by
     (θ, φ) describes an ordinary two dimensional sphere S 2 . The other, labelled by (r, t), describes
     a two dimensional space-time known as AdS2 . This is a solution of two dimensional Einstein
     gravity with negative cosmological constant.

  4. The background described in (2.1.9) has an SO(3) isometry acting on the sphere S 2 . This
     reflects the spherical symmetry of the original black hole and is present even in the full black
     hole solution. The background also has an SO(2,1) isometry acting on the AdS2 space that
     was not present in the full black hole solution. This isometry is generated by
                                                                      
                                                            1 1      2
                        L1 = ∂t , L0 = t∂t − r∂r , L−1 =          + t ∂t − t r ∂r .          (2.1.11)
                                                            2 r2

     Not only the metric, but also the gauge field strengths given in (2.1.9) can be shown to be
     invariant under the SO(2, 1) × SO(3) transformation.

It turns out that all known extremal spherically symmetric black holes in four dimensions with non-
singular horizon have near horizon geometry AdS2 ×S 2 and an associated isometry SO(2, 1)×SO(3).
    Consider now the effect of adding higher derivative terms in the action. In general it is quite
difficult to find the full black hole solution after taking into account these higher derivative terms.
However it is natural to postulate that the symmetries of the near horizon geometry will not be
destroyed by these higher derivative terms. This suggests the following postulate:
In any generally covariant theory of gravity coupled to matter fields, the near horizon geometry of a
spherically symmetric extremal black hole in four dimensions has SO(2, 1) × SO(3) isometry.
We shall take this as the definition of spherically symmetric extremal black holes in four dimensions.
Although we arrived at this definition by analyzing extremal black holes in theories with only two
derivative terms in the action, and possible small modification of the solution due to higher derivative



                                                  10
terms, we shall extend the definition to include even black holes with large curvature at the horizon
so that the higher derivative terms are as important as the two derivative terms.1
   This analysis can be generalized to study spherically symmetric extremal black holes in other
dimensions, as well as rotating extremal black holes in four and other dimensions. In every known
example one finds that the near horizon geometry of extremal black holes has an enhanced SO(2, 1)
isometry that is not present in the full black holes solution. The full isometry of the near horizon
geometry is then the product of the SO(2, 1) isometry and rotational isometry of the full black hole
solution. For example

  1. The near horizon geometry of an extremal spherically symmetric black hole in D dimensions
        has SO(2, 1) × SO(D − 1) isometry.

  2. The near horizon geometry of an extremal rotating black hole in four dimensions has SO(2, 1)×
        U(1) isometry.

We shall take these as definitions of the corresponding extremal black holes even after inclusion of
higher derivative terms.2
    Based on these postulates we shall now develop a general procedure for computing the entropy
of extremal black holes. Our discussion will follow [19, 4, 24].

2.2       Spherically symmetric black holes in D = 4
                                                                                                              (i)
Let us consider a four dimensional theory of gravity coupled to a set of abelian gauge fields Aµ and
                                √
neutral scalar fields {φs }. Let − det g L be the lagrangian density, expressed as a function of the
                                                                            (i)
metric gµν , the scalar fields {φs }, the gauge field strengths Fµν , and covariant derivatives of these
fields. We have not included any antisymmetric rank two tensor field in our list of fields since such
fields can always be dualized to a scalar field. When written in terms of the anti-symmetric tensor
field, the definition of the field strength often contains gauge and Lorentz Chern-Simons terms.
However when written in terms of the dual scalar fields there are no Chern-Simons type term in
the action. Hence reparametrization and gauge invariance of the action implies that L is manifestly
reparametrization invariant and gauge invariant under the usual transformation laws of various fields.
                                                                                 (i)       (i)     (i)
Thus L must be constructed from the scalar fields φs , gauge field strengths Fµν ≡ ∂µ Aν − ∂ν Aµ ,
the inverse metric g µν , the Riemann tensor Rµνρσ and covariant derivatives of these fields.
  1
      Such black holes are called small black holes and will be the subject of discussion in §3.3 and §4.4.
  2
      In four and five dimensions these postulates have recently been proved in [23].



                                                            11
   We consider a spherically symmetric extremal black hole solution with SO(2, 1)×SO(3) invariant
near horizon geometry. The most general field configuration consistent with this isometry is of the
form:
                                                               
                                                           dr 2                     
                         2          µ   ν            2 2
                        ds ≡ gµν dx dx = v1 −r dt + 2 + v2 dθ2 + sin2 θdφ2
                                                            r
                        φs = u s
                           (i)            (i)   pi
                        Frt = ei ,      Fθφ =      sin θ ,                                     (2.2.1)
                                               4π
where v1 , v2 , {us }, {ei } and {pi } are constants. For this background the nonvanishing components
of the Riemann tensor are:

                        Rαβγδ = −v1−1 (gαγ gβδ − gαδ gβγ ) ,           α, β, γ, δ = r, t ,
                        Rmnpq = v2−1 (gmp gnq − gmq gnp ) ,        m, n, p, q = θ, φ .         (2.2.2)

It follows from the general form of the background that the covariant derivatives of the scalar fields
                                 (i)
φs , the gauge field strengths Fµν and the Riemann tensor Rµνρσ all vanish for the near horizon
geometry. By the general symmetry consideration it follows that the contribution to the equation of
motion from any term in L that involves covariant derivatives of the gauge field strengths, scalars or
the Riemann tensor vanish identically for this background and we can restrict our attention to only
those terms which do not involve covariant derivatives of these fields.
                                                             √
   Let us denote by f (~u, ~v, ~e, ~p) the Lagrangian density − det g L evaluated for the near horizon
geometry (2.2.1) and integrated over the angular coordinates:
                                                     Z     p
                                f (~u, ~v , ~e, ~p) = dθ dφ − det g L .                        (2.2.3)

The scalar and the metric field equations in the near horizon geometry correspond to extremizing f
with respect to the variables ~u and ~v :
                                            ∂f              ∂f
                                                = 0,            = 0.                           (2.2.4)
                                            ∂us             ∂vi
Furthermore since us , v1 and v2 describe the most general SO(2, 1) × SO(3) invariant scalar and
metric deformations, these are the only independent components of the equations of motion of scalar
fields and the metric.
    On the other hand the non-trivial components of the gauge field equations and the Bianchi
identities for the full black hole solution takes the form:
                                                !
                                          δS                  (i)
                                    ∂r      (i)
                                                  = 0,    ∂r Fθφ = 0 ,                         (2.2.5)
                                         δFrt

                                                       12
           R     √
where S = d4 x − det gL is the action. These equations are of course automatically satisfied by
the near horizon background (2.2.1), but we can extract more information from them. From (2.2.5)
it follows that                      Z                              Z
                                                  δS                              (i)
                                         dθdφ      (i)
                                                         = ai ,         dθdφ Fθφ = bi ,                            (2.2.6)
                                                 δFrt
where ai and bi are r independent constants. Evaluating these integrals on the near horizon geometry
(2.2.1) gives
                                             ∂f
                                       ai =      ,   bi = pi .                                (2.2.7)
                                             ∂ei
On the other hand if we evaluate the integrals in (2.2.6) at asymptotic infinity, then ai and bi are just
the integrals of electric and magnetic flux at infinity, and hence can be identified with the electric
and magnetic charges respectively. From this it follows that the constants pi appearing in (2.2.1)
correspond to magnetic charges of the black hole, and
                                                           ∂f
                                                               = qi                                                (2.2.8)
                                                           ∂ei
where qi denote the electric charges carried by the black hole.
   For fixed ~p and ~q, (2.2.4) and (2.2.8) give a set of equations which are equal in number to the
number of unknowns ~u, ~v and ~e. In a generic case we may be able to solve these equations completely
to determine the background in terms of only the electric and the magnetic charges ~q and p~. 3 This
is consistent with the attractor mechanism for supersymmetric background which says that the near
horizon configuration of a black hole depends only on the electric and magnetic charges carried by
the black hole and not on the asymptotic values of these scalar fields. We shall elaborate on this in
§2.3.
    Let us define
                                      E(~u, ~v, ~e, ~q, ~p) ≡ 2 π(ei qi − f (~u, ~v, ~e, ~p))                      (2.2.9)

The equations (2.2.4), (2.2.8) determining ~u, ~v and ~e are then given by:

                                   ∂E             ∂E                ∂E              ∂E
                                       = 0,           = 0,              = 0,            = 0.                      (2.2.10)
                                   ∂us            ∂v1               ∂v2             ∂ei
Thus all the near horizon parameters may be determined by extremizing a single function E.
   3
      The situation in string theory is not completely generic. For example in N = 2 supersymmetric string theories
there is no coupling of the hypermultiplet scalars to the vector multiplet fields or the curvature tensor to lowest order in
α′ , and hence in this approximation the function f does not depend on the hypermultiplet scalars. Thus the equations
(2.2.4), (2.2.8) do not fix the values of the hypermultiplet scalars in this approximation.



                                                               13
   We shall now turn to the analysis of the entropy associated with this black hole [3]. A general
formula for the entropy in the presence of higher derivative terms has been given in [5, 25, 26, 27].4
For a spherically symmetric black hole this formula takes the form
                                           Z
                                                      δS √
                              SBH = −8π        dθ dφ        −grr gtt ,                                      (2.2.11)
                                             H       δRrtrt

where H denotes the horizon of the black hole. In computing δS/δRµνρσ in (2.2.11) we need to

   1. express the action S in terms of symmetrized covariant derivatives of fields by replacing anti-
      symmetric combinations of covariant derivatives in terms of the Riemann tensor, and then

   2. treat Rµνρσ as independent variables.

This formula simplifies enormously here since the covariant derivatives of all the tensors vanish, and
as a result
                                       δS      p          ∂L
                                            = − det g          ,                              (2.2.12)
                                     δRrtrt             ∂Rrtrt
where in the expression for L we need to keep only those terms which do not involve explicit covariant
derivatives, and ∂L/∂Rµνρσ is defined through the equation

                                                      ∂L
                                             δL =           δ Rµνρσ .                                       (2.2.13)
                                                     ∂Rµνρσ

In computing δL we need to treat the components of the Riemann tensor as independent variables
not related to the metric. Substituting (2.2.12) into (2.2.11) we get simple formula for the entropy

                                           ∂L                          ∂L
                              SBH = 8π           grr gtt AH = −8π v12        AH ,                           (2.2.14)
                                          ∂Rrtrt                      ∂Rrtrt
where AH is the area of the event horizon.
   In order to express this in terms of the function f defined in (2.2.3), let us denote by fλ (~u, ~v, ~e, p~)
an expression similar to the right hand side of (2.2.3) except that each factor of Rrtrt in the expression
of L is multiplied by a factor of λ. Then we have the relation:
                                                   Z     p
                         ∂fλ (~u, ~v, ~e, ~p)                             ∂L
                                                  = dθ dφ − det g Rαβγδ         ,                 (2.2.15)
                                ∂λ            λ=1                       ∂Rαβγδ
   4
    This formula for the entropy has been derived for regular black holes with bifurcate event horizon and not for
extremal black holes. We are defining the entropy of extremal black holes as the entropy of a non-extremal black hole
in the extremal limit. This allows us to use Wald’s formula.



                                                         14
where the repeated indices α, β, γ, δ are summed over the coordinates r and t. Now since by symmetry
consideration (∂L/∂Rαβγδ ) is proportional to (g αγ g βδ − g αδ g βγ ), we have
                                          ∂L                                     ∂L
                                                = −v12 (g αγ g βδ − g αδ g βγ )        .                                (2.2.16)
                                         ∂Rαβγδ                                 ∂Rrtrt
The constant of proportionality has been fixed by taking (αβγδ) = (rtrt). Using (2.2.2) and (2.2.16),
and that for a spherically symmetric background ∂L/∂Rrtrt is independent of the (θ, φ) coordinates,
we can rewrite (2.2.15) as
                                  ∂fλ (~u, ~v, ~e, ~p)              ∂L
                                                           = 4 v12        AH .                                          (2.2.17)
                                         ∂λ            λ=1         ∂Rrtrt
Substituting this into (2.2.14) gives
                                                                  ∂fλ (~u, ~v, ~e, p~)
                                               SBH = −2π                                   .                            (2.2.18)
                                                                         ∂λ            λ=1

    We shall now try to express the right hand side of (2.2.18) in terms of derivatives of f with respect
to the variables ~u, ~v , ~e and p~. For this let us focus on the v1 dependence of fλ . Since the expression for
L is invariant under reparametrization of the r, t coordinates, every factor of Rrtrt in the expression
                                                                                    (i)
for fλ must appear in the combination λ g rr g tt Rrtrt = −λv1−1 , every factor of Frt must appear in
                 √          (i)                                 (i)
the combination −g rr g tt Frt = ei v1−1 , and every factor of Fθφ = pi /4π and φs = us must appear
without any accompanying power of v1 . The contribution from all terms which involve covariant
                    (i)
derivatives of Fµν , Rµνρσ or φs vanish; hence there is no further factor of v1 coming from contraction
of the metric with these derivative operators. The only other v1 dependence of fλ (~u, ~v, ~e, ~p) is through
                                     √
the overall multiplicative factor of − det g ∝ v1 . Thus fλ (~u, ~v , ~e, ~p) must be of the form

                                         fλ (~u, ~v , ~e, p~) = v1 g(~u, v2 , ~p, λv1−1, ~ev1−1 ) ,                     (2.2.19)

for some function g. This gives
               ∂fλ (~u, ~v, ~e, ~p)      ∂fλ (~u, ~v , ~e, p~)      ∂fλ (~u, ~v , ~e, ~p)
           λ                        + v1                       + ei                       − fλ (~u, ~v, ~e, ~p) = 0 .   (2.2.20)
                      ∂λ                       ∂v1                        ∂ei
Setting λ = 1 in (2.2.20), using the equation of motion of v1 as given in (2.2.4), and substituting the
result into eq.(2.2.18) we get                                        
                                                               ∂f
                                              SBH = 2π ei          −f .                                   (2.2.21)
                                                               ∂ei
This together with (2.2.8) shows that SBH (~q, ~p)/2π may be regarded as the Legendre transform of the
function f (~u, ~v , ~e, ~p) with respect to the variables ei after eliminating ~u and ~v through their equations
of motion (2.2.4). Using (2.2.9) we can also express (2.2.21) as

                                                      SBH = E(~u, ~v , ~e, ~q, p~) ,                                    (2.2.22)

                                                                    15
at the extremum (2.2.10). This suggests that we call the function E the entropy function [3].
    We can take a slightly different viewpoint in which we define the entropy function E as a function
of ~u, ~v, ~q and ~p after eliminating the electric field variables ~e by the ∂f /∂ei = qi condition. In
this form the entropy function given in (2.2.9) will just be 2π times the Legendre transform of the
function f with respect to the variables {ei }. We shall continue to use the same symbol E for both
entropy functions since the second definition is obtained from the first simply by extremizing the
latter with respect to {ei }.
    Given an action, the entropy function formalism reduces the problem of computing the entropy
of an extremal black hole into the problem of solving a set of algebraic equations. We shall illustrate
this by applying this formalism to extremal Reissner-Nordstrom black hole in the Maxwell-Einstein
theory described by the action (2.1.1). The most general SO(2, 1) × SO(3) invariant background in
this theory is given by
                                                            
                                2                       dr 2                  
                           ds       = v1         2   2
                                               −r dt + 2 + v2 dθ2 + sin2 θdφ2
                                                         r
                            Frt = e,             Fθφ = p sin θ/4π .                             (2.2.23)

Using (2.1.1), (2.2.2) we get
                                    Z   p
            f (v1 , v2 , e, p) ≡           − det g L
                                        dθdφ
                                                                              
                                            1        2  2     1 −2 2 1 −2  p 2
                             = 4π v1 v2             − +      + v1 e − v2           .            (2.2.24)
                                          16πGN      v1 v2    2      2     4π
This in turn gives

         E(v1 , v2 , e, q, p) ≡ 2π(q e − f )
                                                                                     p 2 
                                             1                       −1 2         −1
                              = 2π q e −       (2v1 − 2v2 ) − 2π v2 v1 e + 2π v1 v2           . (2.2.25)
                                          4GN                                         4π
It is easy to verify that E has an extremum at

                                                         q 2 + p2           q
                                        v1 = v2 = GN              ,   e=      .                 (2.2.26)
                                                            4π             4π
Substituting this into the expression for E we get
                                                        1
                                               SBH ≡ E = (q 2 + p2 ) .                          (2.2.27)
                                                        4
Eqs.(2.2.26) reproduces (2.1.6), (2.1.9) and (2.2.27) reproduces (2.1.10).

                                                           16
   Finally we note that although the entropy function formalism developed in this section gives a
simple method for computing the entropy of an extremal black hole if such a solution exists, our
analysis does not tell us if the full black hole solution, interpolating between AdS2 × S 2 near horizon
geometry and the asymptotically flat Minkowski space, really exists. For a general two derivative
theory this issue has been addressed in [28] where it was shown that such a solution exists provided
the matrix of second derivatives of the entropy function with respect to the scalar field values at the
horizon is positive definite at the extremum of the entropy function. Whether there is a generalization
of this result in higher derivative theories is still an open question.

2.3    Attractor, field redefinition and duality transformation
In this section we shall discuss some important consequences of the results derived in §2.2.

  1. Since the construction of the function E involves knowledge of only the Lagrangian density, the
     functional form of E is independent of asymptotic values of the moduli scalar fields, – scalar
      fields which have no potential in flat space-time and hence can take arbitrary constant values
      asymptotically. Thus if the extremization equations (2.2.10) determine all the parameters ~u,
      ~v, ~e uniquely then the value of E at the extremum and hence the entropy SBH is completely
       independent of the asymptotic values of the moduli fields. If on the other hand the function
       E has flat directions then only some combinations of the parameters ~u, ~v , ~e are determined by
      extremizing E, and the rest may depend on the asymptotic values of the moduli fields. However
      since E is independent of the flat directions, it depends only on the combination of parameters
      which are fixed by the extremization equations. As a result the value of E at the extremum
      is still independent of the asymptotic moduli. This shows that the entropy of the black hole
      is independent of the asymptotic values of the moduli fields irrespective of whether or not E
      has flat directions. This is a generalization of the usual attractor mechanism for black holes in
      supergravity theories [29, 30, 31].
      This result in particular implies that the entropy of an extremal black hole does not change as we
      change the asymptotic value of the string coupling constant from a sufficiently large value where
      the black hole description is good to a sufficiently small value where the microscopic description
      is expected to be valid. This fact has been used to argue that under certain conditions the
      statistical entropy of the system, computed at weak string coupling, should match the black
      hole entropy even for non-supersymmetric extremal black holes [32].



                                                   17
   2. An arbitrary field redefinition of the metric and the scalar fields will induce a redefinition of the
      parameters ~u, ~v , and hence the functional form of E will change.5 However, since the value of
       E at the extremum is invariant under non-singular field redefinition, the entropy is unchanged
       under a redefinition of the metric and other scalar fields. To see this more explicitly, let us
       consider a reparametrization of ~u and ~v of the form:

                                         u
                                         bs = gs (~u, ~v , ~e, ~p),    vbi = hi (~u, ~v, ~e, ~p) ,               (2.3.1)

       for some functions {gs }, {hi }. Then it follows from eqs.(2.2.3), (2.2.9) that the new entropy
                b ~u
       function E( b, ~b
                       v, ~e, ~q, ~p) is given by:

                                              b ~u
                                              E( b, ~b
                                                     v, ~e, ~q, ~p) = E(~u, ~v, ~e, ~q, p~) .                    (2.3.2)

       It is now easy to see that eqs.(2.2.10) are equivalent to:

                                     ∂ Eb             ∂ Eb             ∂ Eb               ∂ Eb
                                          = 0,             = 0,             = 0,               = 0.              (2.3.3)
                                     ∂b
                                      us              ∂b
                                                       v1              ∂b
                                                                        v2                ∂ei

       Thus the value of Eb evaluated at this extremum is equal to the value of E evaluated at the
       extremum (2.2.10), showing that the entropy of an extremal black hole remains unchanged
       under field redefinition. This result of course is a consequence of the field redefinition invariance
       of Wald’s entropy formula as discussed in [25].

   3. As is well known, Lagrangian density is not invariant under an electric-magnetic duality trans-
      formation. However, the function E, being Legendre transformation of the Lagrangian density
       with respect to the electric field variables, is invariant under an electric-magnetic duality trans-
       formation. In other words, if instead of the original Lagrangian density L, we use an equivalent
       dual Lagrangian density Le where some of the gauge fields have been dualized, and construct
                                e u, ~v, ~q, ~p) from this new Lagrangian density, then E and Ee will be
       a new entropy function E(~
       related to each other by exchange of the appropriate qi ’s and pi ’s.

2.4     Spherically symmetric black holes for arbitrary D
The analysis can be generalized to higher dimensional theories as follows. We begin with a D-
dimensional field theory of metric, various p-form gauge fields and neutral scalars with lagrangian
   5
     A redefinition of gauge fields preserving the gauge transformation laws requires adding to the gauge field a gauge
invariant vector field constructed out of other fields and their covariant derivatives. Since in the AdS2 × S 2 background
all such vector fields vanish, the parameters labeling the gauge field strengths are not redefined.

                                                               18
density L. In this section we shall assume that the neither the definition of the field strengths
associated with the p-form gauge fields, nor the Lagrangian density has any Chern-Simons terms.
Thus the Lagrangian density will be manifestly invariant under general coordinate transformation
and gauge transformation of the p-form gauge field Bµ1 ···µp of the form

                                             δBµ1 ···µp = ∂[µ1 Λµ2 ···µp ] .                      (2.4.1)

The cases where either the Lagrangian density or the definition of a field strength has a Chern-Simons
term will be dealt with separately in §2.6.
   In D space-time dimensions the near horizon geometry of a spherically symmetric extremal black
hole solution has SO(2, 1)×SO(D−1) isometry. This forces the metric to have the form AdS2 ×S D−2 .
The relevant fields which can take non-trivial expectation values near the horizon are scalars {φs },
                           (i)                              (a)                             (m)
metric gµν , gauge fields Aµ , (D − 3)-form gauge fields Bµ1 ...µD−3 , 2-form gauge fields Cµν and
                              (I)
(D − 2)-form gauge fields Dµ1 ···µD−2 . If
                                                                    (a)
                                          Hµ(a)
                                             1 ...µD−2
                                                       = ∂[µ1 Bµ2 ···µD−2 ] ,                     (2.4.2)

denotes the field strength associated with the field B (a) , then the general background consistent with
the SO(2, 1) × SO(D − 1) symmetry of the background geometry is of the form:
                                                                 
                                                             dr 2
                        2       µ    ν            2 2
                     ds ≡ gµν dx dx = v1 −r dt + 2 + v2 dΩ2D−2
                                                              r
                                 (m)              (I)
                                                                         √
                     φs = us , Crt = wm , Dl1 ···lD−2 = zI ǫl1 ···lD−2 det h(D−2) /ΩD−2
                       (i)            (a)
                                                                √
                     Frt = ei ,    Hl1 ···lD−2 = pa ǫl1 ···lD−2 det h(D−2) /ΩD−2 ,                (2.4.3)

where v1 , v2 , {us }, {wm }, {zI }, {ei } and {pa } are constants parametrizing the background, dΩ2D−2 ≡
 (D−2)       ′
hll′ dxl dxl denotes the line element on the unit (D − 2)-sphere, ΩD−2 denotes the volume of the
unit (D − 2)-sphere, xli with 2 ≤ li ≤ (D − 1) are coordinates along this sphere and ǫ denotes the
totally anti-symmetric symbol with ǫ2...(D−1) = 1. Any other k-form field for k different from 1, 2,
D − 3 or D − 2 will vanish in this background since the only SO(2, 1) × SO(D − 2) invariant forms
on AdS2 × S D−2 are the 2-form corresponding to the volume form on AdS2 and the (D − 2)-form
                                                                                                     (m)
corresponding to the volume form on S D−2 . Even among the ones given above, the constant Crt
background proportional to wm can be removed by gauge transformation.
   We now define                                      Z                     p
                              f (~u, ~v , ~e, ~p) =       dx2 · · · dxD−1    − det g L ,          (2.4.4)


                                                              19
as in (2.2.3). Note that since the lagrangian density depends on the various k-form fields only through
their field strength, f is independent of w~ and ~z.6 Analysis identical to that for D = 4 now tells us
that the constants pa represent magnetic type charges carried by the black hole, and the equations
which determine the values of ~u, ~v and ~e are
                                      ∂f                 ∂f                  ∂f
                                          = 0,               = 0,                = qi ,         (2.4.5)
                                      ∂us                ∂vi                 ∂ei
where qi denote the electric charges carried by the black hole. w
                                                                ~ and ~z remain undermined. Also
using (2.2.14) which is valid for spherically symmetric black holes in any dimension, we can show
that the entropy of the black hole is given by 2π times the Legendre transform of f :
                                                           
                                                     ∂f
                                      SBH = 2π ei        −f .                              (2.4.6)
                                                     ∂ei

as in (2.2.21).
    As in the case of four dimensional black holes, we can define

                                     E(~u, ~v, ~e, ~q, ~p) ≡ 2 π(ei qi − f (~u, ~v, ~e, ~p))    (2.4.7)

The equations (2.4.5) determining ~u, ~v and ~e are then given by:
                                  ∂E             ∂E                ∂E              ∂E
                                      = 0,           = 0,              = 0,            = 0.     (2.4.8)
                                  ∂us            ∂v1               ∂v2             ∂ei
Furthermore (2.4.6) shows that the entropy associated with the black hole is given by:

                                                SBH = E(~u, ~v , ~e, ~q, p~) ,                  (2.4.9)

at the extremum (2.4.8).
  A useful viewpoint that treats extremal black holes in all dimensions in one go is to regard the
 D−2
S   part of the near horizon geometry as a compact space and treat the effective field theory
governing the dynamics of the near horizon geometry as two dimensional. The effective Lagrangian
density of this two dimensional theory spanned by r and t is given by
                                                Z    p
                                 √          (2)
                                   − det h L =         − det g L ,                       (2.4.10)
                                                                S D−2

where gµν and L denote the original D-dimensional metric and Lagrangian density, and hαβ and L(2)
denote the two dimensional metric and two dimensional Lagrangian density obtained via dimensional
  6
      As we shall see in §2.6, this situation will change once we allow Chern-Simons terms.

                                                              20
reduction. Only non-trivial degrees of freedom in this two dimensional theory are the metric, gauge
fields and scalars coming from the dimensional reduction of various D-dimensional fields on S D−2 .
The magnetic charges pa labeling the flux of the (D − 2)-form field strengths through S D−2 appear as
parameters in this two dimensional theory. The most general near horizon configuration consistent
with SO(2, 1) isometry of AdS2 will have an AdS2 metric, constant two dimensional gauge field
strengths and constant scalars. By regarding this as the near horizon geometry of a two dimensional
extremal black hole, we can write the Wald’s formula for the entropy as

                                               δS p
                                 SBH = −8π      (2)
                                                     −hrr htt         ,                          (2.4.11)
                                              δRrtrt          Horizon
              R        √
where S ≡          drdt − det h L(2) now is to be regarded as a two dimensional action. For extremal
black holes all covariant derivatives of scalar fields and field strengths vanish, and we have the analog
of (2.2.14)
                                                ∂L(2)
                                   SBH = 8π         (2)
                                                        hrr htt         .                         (2.4.12)
                                                ∂Rrtrt          Horizon
If we now define
                                            √
                                       f = − det h L(2)                                           (2.4.13)
                                                             Horizon
and
                                            E = 2π(qi ei − f ) ,                                  (2.4.14)

then one can show, following the same procedure as in §2.2, that the parameters labeling the near
horizon background are obtained by extremizing E with respect to these various parameters, and
furthermore that the entropy itself is given by the function E evaluated at its extremum.
   The arguments of §2.3 can now be used to prove attractor behaviour of these black holes. We
shall see in §2.5 that the two dimensional viewpoint provides a useful tool for proving the attractor
behaviour of extremal rotating black holes as well.

2.5     Rotating black holes in D = 4
In this section we shall describe the construction of the entropy function for rotating black holes in
four dimensions following the analysis performed in [24]. The results can be easily generalized to
higher dimensions. Early work on attractor mechanism for rotating black holes has been carried out
in [33, 34, 35].



                                                   21
    As in §2.2 we begin by considering a general four dimensional theory of gravity coupled to a set
                         (i)
of abelian gauge fields Aµ and neutral scalar fields {φs } with action
                                           Z      p
                                      S = d4 x − det g L ,                                   (2.5.1)
       √
where − det g L is the lagrangian density, expressed as a function of the metric gµν , the Riemann
                                                                   (i)      (i)     (i)
tensor Rµνρσ , the scalar fields {φs }, the gauge field strengths Fµν = ∂µ Aν − ∂ν Aµ , and covariant
derivatives of these fields. In general L will contain terms with more than two derivatives. We
now define a rotating extremal black hole solution to be one whose near horizon geometry has the
symmetries of AdS2 ×S 1 , – this holds for known extremal rotating black hole solutions [36,24] and has
recently been proven in [23]. The most general field configuration consistent with the SO(2, 1)×U(1)
symmetry of AdS2 × S 1 is of the form:7
                                                         
                                                     dr 2
               ds ≡ gµν dx dx = v1 (θ) −r dt + 2 + β 2 dθ2 + β 2 v2 (θ)(dφ + αrdt)2
                 2          µ  ν             2 2
                                                      r
               φs = us (θ)
               1 (i) µ
                 Fµν dx ∧ dxν = (ei + αbi (θ))dr ∧ dt + ∂θ bi (θ)dθ ∧ (dφ + αrdt) ,            (2.5.2)
               2
where α, β and ei are constants, and v1 , v2 , us and bi are functions of θ. Here φ is a periodic
coordinate with period 2π and θ takes value in the range 0 ≤ θ ≤ π. The SO(2,1) isometry of AdS2
is generated by the Killing vectors [36]:

           L1 = ∂t ,   L0 = t∂t − r∂r ,       L−1 = (1/2)(1/r 2 + t2 )∂t − (tr)∂r − (α/r)∂φ .              (2.5.3)

       A simple way to see the SO(2, 1) × U(1) symmetry of the configuration (2.5.2) is as follows.
The U(1) transformation acts as a translation of φ and is clearly a symmetry of this configuration.
In order to see the SO(2,1) symmetry of this background we regard φ as a compact direction and
interprete this as a theory in three dimensions labelled by coordinates {xm } ≡ (r, θ, t) with metric
                     (i)
ĝmn , gauge fields am and am and scalar fields ψ and χi defined through the relations

                                    ds2 = ĝmn dxm dxn + ψ(dφ + am dxm )2
                                A(i)
                                 µ dx
                                     µ
                                       = a(i) m                m
                                          m dx + χi (dφ + am dx ) .                                        (2.5.4)
                                                                                                                (i)
Besides these we also have scalar fields φs descending down from four dimensions. If we denote by fmn
                                                                                (i)
and fmn the field strengths associated with the three dimensional gauge fields am and am respectively,
   7
    Our convention for α differs from the one used in [24] by a minus sign. With this new convention the variable J
conjugate to α will represent angular momentum in the standard convention.

                                                        22
then the background (2.5.2) can be interpreted as the following three dimensional background:
                                                              
                   b 2                                    dr 2
                   ds ≡ ĝmn dx dx = v1 (θ) −r dt + 2 + β 2 dθ2
                                m   n              2 2
                                                           r
                                          2
                   φs = us (θ),     ψ = β v2 (θ), χi = bi (θ) ,
                   1 (i) m                            1
                     fmn dx ∧ dxn = ei dr ∧ dt,         fmn dxm ∧ dxn = α dr ∧ dt .        (2.5.5)
                   2                                  2
The (r, t) coordinates now describe an AdS2 space and this background is manifestly SO(2, 1) in-
variant. In this description the Killing vectors take the standard form

                L1 = ∂t ,     L0 = t∂t − r∂r ,          L−1 = (1/2)(1/r 2 + t2 )∂t − (tr)∂r .    (2.5.6)

  Let us now return to the four dimensional viewpoint. For the configuration given in (2.5.2) the
magnetic charge associated with the ith gauge field is given by
                                   Z
                                            (i)
                              pi = dθdφFθφ = 2π(bi (π) − bi (0)) .                        (2.5.7)

Since an additive constant in bi can be absorbed into the parameters ei , we can set bi (0) = −pi /4π.
This, together with (2.5.7), now gives
                                                 pi                     pi
                                    bi (0) = −      ,        bi (π) =      .                     (2.5.8)
                                                 4π                     4π
We shall assume that the deformed horizon, labelled by the coordinates θ and φ, is a smooth defor-
mation of the sphere. In particular there should be no conical defects near θ = 0, π. We shall further
assume that the gauge field strengths and scalar fields are also smooth at θ = 0, π. This requires

                            v2 (θ) = θ2 + O(θ4 ) for θ ≃ 0
                                  = (π − θ)2 + O((π − θ)4 ) for θ ≃ π ,                          (2.5.9)

                                          pi
                              bi (θ) = −     + O(θ2 ) for θ ≃ 0
                                         4π
                                       pi
                                     =     + O((π − θ)2 ) for θ ≃ π ,                           (2.5.10)
                                       4π

                             us (θ) = us (0) + O(θ2 ) for θ ≃ 0
                                    = us (π) + O((π − θ)2 ) for θ ≃ π .                         (2.5.11)

Note that the smoothness of the background requires the Taylor series expansion around θ = 0, π
to contain only even powers of θ and (π − θ) respectively. This can be seen by expressing the

                                                        23
solutions near θ = 0 or θ = π using the local Cartesian coordinates (x, y) = (sin θ cos φ, sin θ sin φ)
and requiring the solution to be non-singular and invariant under φ translation in this coordinate
system.
    Eq.(2.5.5) and hence (2.5.2) describes the most general field configuration consistent with the
SO(2, 1) × U(1) symmetry. Thus in order to derive the equations of motion we can evaluate the ac-
tion on this background and then extremize the resulting expression with respect to the parameters
labeling the background (2.5.2). The only exception to this are the parameters ei and α labeling
the field strengths. From the three dimensional viewpoint we see that the background (2.5.5) auto-
                                                                 (i)
matically satisfies the equations of motion of the gauge fields am and am . Thus the variation of the
action with respect to the parameters ei and α need not vanish, – instead they give the corresponding
conserved electric charges qi and the angular momentum J (which can be regarded as the electric
charge associated with the three dimensional gauge field am .)
   To implement this procedure we define:
                                                                  Z    p
                                                          ~
                       f [α, β, ~e, v1 (θ), v2 (θ), ~u(θ), b(θ)] = dθdφ − det g L .                                 (2.5.12)

Note that f is a function of α, β, ei and a functional of v1 (θ), v2 (θ), us (θ) and bi (θ). The equations
of motion now correspond to
  ∂f           ∂f           ∂f                 δf               δf                 δf                  δf
     = J,         = 0,          = qi ,               = 0,             = 0,               = 0,                = 0 . (2.5.13)
  ∂α           ∂β           ∂ei              δv1 (θ)          δv2 (θ)            δus (θ)             δbi (θ)
Equivalently, if we define:
                                                                                                             
                                          ~                                                             ~
 E[J, ~q, α, β, ~e, v1 (θ), v2 (θ), ~u(θ), b(θ)] = 2π Jα + ~q · ~e − f [α, β, ~e, v1 (θ), v2 (θ), ~u(θ), b(θ)] , (2.5.14)

then the equations of motion take the form:
  ∂E           ∂E           ∂E                 δE               δE                 δE                 δE
     = 0,         = 0,          = 0,                 = 0,             = 0,               = 0,                = 0.   (2.5.15)
  ∂α           ∂β           ∂ei              δv1 (θ)          δv2 (θ)            δus (θ)             δbi (θ)
   These equations are subject to the boundary conditions (2.5.9), (2.5.10), (2.5.11). For formal
arguments it will be useful to express the various functions of θ appearing here by expanding them as
a linear combination of appropriate basis states which make the constraints (2.5.9), (2.5.10) manifest,
and then varying E with respect to the coefficients appearing in this expansion. The natural functions
in terms of which we can expand an arbitrary φ-independent function on a sphere are the Legendre
polynomials Pl (cos θ). We take
                            ∞
                            X                                                     ∞
                                                                                  X
                                                                   2         4
                 v1 (θ) =         v1 (l) Pl (cos θ) ,
                                  e                     v2 (θ) = sin θ + sin θ           ve2 (l) Pl (cos θ) ,
                            l=0                                                    l=0


                                                            24
                            ∞
                            X                                                        X∞
                                                                      pi          2      ebi (l) Pl (cos θ) .
                 us (θ) =         u
                                  es (l) Pl (cos θ) ,       bi (θ) = − cos θ + sin θ
                            l=0
                                                                      4π             l=0
                                                                                                                 (2.5.16)

This expansion explicitly implements the constraints (2.5.9), (2.5.10) and (2.5.11). Substituting this
into (2.5.14) gives E as a function of J, qi , α, β, ei , e
                                                          v1 (l), e       es (l) and ebi (l). Thus the equations
                                                                  v2 (l), u
(2.5.15) may now be reexpressed as
   ∂E          ∂E           ∂E                ∂E                   ∂E              ∂E              ∂E
      = 0,        = 0,          = 0,                 = 0,                 = 0,            = 0,            = 0.   (2.5.17)
   ∂α          ∂β           ∂ei              ∂e
                                              v1 (l)              ∂e
                                                                   v2 (l)         ∂e
                                                                                   us (l)        ∂ebi (l)
   Let us now turn to the analysis of the entropy associated with this black hole. For this it will be
most convenient to regard this configuration as a two dimensional extremal black hole by regarding
the θ and φ directions as compact. In this interpretation the zero mode of the metric b
                                                                                      gαβ given in
(2.5.5), with α, β = r, t, is interpreted as the two dimensional metric hαβ :
                                                  Z
                                                1 π
                                         hαβ =       dθ sin θ b
                                                              gαβ ,                                              (2.5.18)
                                                2 0
whereas all the non-zero modes of b
                                  gαβ are interpreted as massive symmetric rank two tensor fields.
This gives
                            hαβ dxα dxβ = v1 (−r 2 dt2 + dr 2 /r 2 ) ,           v1 ≡ e
                                                                                      v1 (0) .                   (2.5.19)
Thus the near horizon configuration, regarded from two dimensions, involves AdS2 metric, accom-
                                                 (i)
panied by background electric fields fαβ and fαβ , a set of massless and massive scalar fields with
vacuum expectation values u       v2 (l), ebi (l), and a set of massive symmetric rank two tensor fields
                          es (l), e
with vacuum expectations values ve1 (l)hαβ /e
                                            v1 (0). According to the Wald formula [5, 25, 26, 27], the
entropy of this black hole is given by:
                                                 δS (2) p
                                    SBH = −8π       (2)
                                                          −hrr htt ,                          (2.5.20)
                                                 δRrtrt
         (2)
where Rαβγδ is the two dimensional Riemann tensor associated with the metric hαβ , and S (2) is the
general coordinate invariant action of this two dimensional field theory. We now note that for this
                                                                          (i)
two dimensional configuration that we have, the electric field strengths fαβ and fαβ are proportional
to the volume form on AdS2 , the scalar fields are constants and the tensor fields are proportional to
the AdS2 metric. Thus the covariant derivatives of all gauge and generally covariant tensors which
one can construct out of these two dimensional fields vanish. In this case (2.5.20) simplifies to:
                                                        √             ∂L(2) p
                                      SBH = −8π             − det h     (2)
                                                                             −hrr htt                            (2.5.21)
                                                                      ∂Rrtrt

                                                                25
      √
where − det h L(2) is the two dimensional Lagrangian density, related to the four dimensional
Lagrangian density via the formula:
                                              Z    p
                               √          (2)
                                 − det h L = dθdφ − det g L .                        (2.5.22)

Also while computing (2.5.21) we set to zero all terms in L(2) which involve covariant derivatives of
the Riemann tensor, gauge field strengths, scalars and the massive tensor fields.
    We can now proceed in a manner identical to that in §2.2, §2.4 to show that the right hand side
of (2.5.21) is the entropy function at its extremum. First of all from (2.5.19) it follows that
                                                     (2)
                                                                            p
                                                   Rrtrt = v1 =                 −hrr htt .                           (2.5.23)

Using this we can express (2.5.21) as

                                                                 √                ∂L(2)           (2)
                                              SBH = −8π              − det h       (2)
                                                                                              Rrtrt .                (2.5.24)
                                                                                 ∂Rrtrt
                       (2)                                                                                     (2)
Let us denote by Lλ a deformation of L(2) in which we replace all factors of Rαβγδ for α, β, γ, δ = r, t
      (2)
by λRαβγδ , and define
                                                      (2)
                                                                 √                     (2)
                                                    fλ ≡             − det h Lλ ,                                    (2.5.25)

evaluated on the near horizon geometry. Then
                               (2)        √                                 √
                             ∂fλ                           (2)   ∂L(2)                 (2) ∂L
                                                                                              (2)
                         λ            =       − det h Rαβγδ        (2)
                                                                        = 4  − det h Rrtrt   (2)
                                                                                                  .                  (2.5.26)
                              ∂λ                                 δRαβγδ                    ∂Rrtrt

Using this (2.5.24) may be rewritten as
                                                                                 (2)
                                                             ∂f
                                                   SBH = −2πλ λ                               .                      (2.5.27)
                                                              ∂λ                       λ=1

Next we consider the effect of the scaling

                 λ → sλ,             ei → sei ,    α → sα,             v1 (l) → se
                                                                       e         v1 (l) for             0 ≤ l < ∞,   (2.5.28)
                 (2)                    (2)
under which λ Rαβγδ → s2 λ Rαβγδ . Since L(2) does not involve any explicit covariant derivatives, all
                                                                      (i)               (2)
indices of hαβ must contract with the indices in fαβ , fαβ , Rαβγδ or the indices of the massive rank two
symmetric tensor fields whose near horizon values are proportional to the parameters ve1 (l). From
                                                                                                         (2)
                                               v1 (l), and α it follows that Lλ remains invariant under
this and the definition of the parameters ei , e

                                                                      26
                               (2)                            (2)                                          √
this scaling, and hence fλ transforms to sfλ , with the overall factor of s coming from the                    − det h
                             (2)
factor in the definition of fλ . Thus we have:
                                       (2)        X   (2)           (2)      ∞           (2)
                                ∂f     ∂f    ∂f           ∂f      (2)
                               λ λ + ei λ + α λ +   v1 (l) λ = fλ .
                                                    e                                                      (2.5.29)
                                 ∂λ     ∂ei   ∂α          ∂e
                                                           v1 (l)
                                                                             l=0

Now it follows from (2.5.12), (2.5.22) and (2.5.25) that
                                                                                         (2)
                                           f [α, β, ~e, v1 (θ), v2 (θ), ~u(θ), ~b(θ)] = fλ=1 .             (2.5.30)

Thus the extremization equations (2.5.13) implies that
                                     (2)                (2)                  (2)
                              ∂fλ                     ∂fλ                 ∂fλ
                                   = qi ,                 = J,                    = 0,     at λ = 1 .      (2.5.31)
                               ∂ei                     ∂α                 ∂e
                                                                           v1 (l)

Hence setting λ = 1 in (2.5.29) we get
           (2)
         ∂fλ                                    (2)
     λ                 = −ei qi − Jα + fλ=1 = −ei qi − Jα + f [α, β, ~e, v1 (θ), v2 (θ), ~u(θ), ~b(θ)] .   (2.5.32)
          ∂λ     λ=1

Eqs.(2.5.27) and the definition (2.5.14) of the entropy function now gives

                                                                SBH = E                                    (2.5.33)

at its extremum.
   The arguments of §2.3 can now be used to prove attractor behaviour of these black holes, ı.e. the
black hole entropy depends only on the charges {qi , pi } and the angular momentum J but not on
any other asymptotic data.
   For practical computations it is often useful to work with the functions vi (θ), us (θ) and bi (θ)
instead of their mode decompositions given in (2.5.16). In this case the extremization of the entropy
functional E with respect to these functions, as described in eqs.(2.5.15), would give rise to a set of
ordinary differential equations in θ for these functions, and the entropy is obtained by evaluating the
entropy function at a solution of these equations. In order to carry out this procedure we need to
carefully keep track of all the boundary terms that arise in the expression for the entropy function.
This has been discussed in detail in [24] where we have also illustrated the general method by applying
it to a specific class of rotating black holes in string theory studied in [37, 38, 39, 40].
   Finally, one interesting question that arises for rotating black holes is whether the horizon can
have non-spherical topology, e.g. the topology of a torus. Although in two derivative theories the

                                                                     27
horizon of a four dimensional black hole is known to have spherical topology, once higher derivative
terms are added to the action there may be other possibilities. Our analysis can be easily generalized
to the case where the horizon has the topology of a torus rather than a sphere. All we need to do is
to take the θ coordinate to be a periodic variable with period 2π and expand the various functions
in the basis of periodic functions of θ. However if the near horizon geometry is invariant under both
φ and θ translations, then in the expression for L−1 given in (2.5.3) we could add a term of the
form −(γ/r)∂θ , and the entropy could have an additional dependence on the charge conjugate to the
variable γ. This represents the Noether charge associated with θ translation, but does not correspond
to a physical charge from the point of view of the asymptotic observer since the full solution is not
invariant under θ translation. These are commonly known as dipole charges. The entropy function
method can also be used to compute entropies of higher dimensional black holes with non-spherical
horizons where such solutions are known to exist even for two derivative action [41, 42].

2.6    Dealing with Chern-Simons terms
The analysis in the previous sections relies on several important assumptions about the structure of
the Lagrangian density. In particular we have assumed that

  1. The lagrangian density depends on the metric in a manifestly covariant manner, namely the
      only dependence on the metric comes via the metric, Riemann tensor and covariant derivatives
      of various tensor fields, but does not have any explicit dependence on spin connections and
      Christoffel symbols.

  2. For any p-form gauge field B present in the theory, the covariant field strength has the form
      H = dB so that H satisfies the Bianchi identity dH = 0. If this is not the case, then a field
      configuration of the form given in (2.4.3) will not automatically satisfy the Bianchi identity,
      and we shall get additional constraints on the parameters labeling the near horizon background
      by requiring that H satisfies the Bianchi identity.
                                           (i)
  3. The dependence on the gauge fields Aµ and more generally on the (D−3)-form gauge fields B (a)
     appears through their field strengths. Otherwise we shall encounter the following problems:

      (a) If the lagrangian density had any explicit dependence on the gauge fields then the gauge
          field equations of motion would not take the form given in (2.2.5).
                                                                                      (i)      (a)
      (b) While making the ansatz (2.4.3) we have taken the gauge field strengths Frt and Hl1 ···lD−2
           to be invariant under the symmetries of AdS2 × S D−2 , but the gauge fields themselves do

                                                  28
           not carry the symmetry. As a result the Lagrangian density evaluated in the background
           will be invariant under the symmetries of AdS2 ×S D−2 only if it does not involve explicitly
           the gauge fields and is a function only of the field strengths. Otherwise the extremization
           of the entropy function may not give the complete set of independent equations of motion.

   The type of Lagrangian densities which appear in low energy effective action of string theory often
violates one or more of these conditions. In particular the Lagrangian density often involves Chern-
Simons forms, which are totally antisymmetric tensors Ωµ1 ...µn which depend on one or more lower
rank gauge fields or spin connetions / Christoffel symbols rather than just on the field strengths. As a
result Ω is not invariant under the gauge transformation associated with these lower rank gauge fields.
Nevertheless Ω has the special property that the variation of Ω under various gauge transformations
are exact forms:
                                      δΩµ1 ...µn = ∂[µ1 χµ2 ...µn ] ,                        (2.6.1)

for some quantity χ. As a result ∂[µ1 Ωµ2 ...µn+1 ] is a covariant tensor.
    A simple example of such a Chern-Simons term is as follows. Suppose the theory contains a
                     (1)                                           (2)
p-form gauge field Bµ1 ...µp and a q-form gauge field Bµ1 ...µq , with associated gauge transformations of
the form
                                                 (1)                                    (2)
                           δBµ(1)
                               1 ...µp
                                       = ∂[µ1 Λµ2 ...µp ]         δBµ(2)
                                                                      1 ...µq
                                                                              = ∂[µ1 Λµ2 ...µq ] .   (2.6.2)

Then the (p + q + 1)-form
                                                       (1)                 (2)
                                  Ωµ1 ...µp+q+1 = B[µ1 ...µp ∂µp+1 Bµp+2 ...µp+q+1 ]                 (2.6.3)

transforms by a total derivative of the form (2.6.1) under the gauge transformation induced by Λ(1) .
Thus Ωµ1 ...µp+q+1 defined in (2.6.3) is a Chern-Simons (p + q + 1)-form.
   The Chern-Simons terms could appear in the expression for the lagrangian density in two different
ways:

  1. The action itself may contain a Chern-Simons term of the form
                                        Z
                                           dD x ǫµ1 ...µD Ωµ1 ...µD .                                (2.6.4)

      Since δΩ is a total derivative, an action of this form is gauge invariant up to boundary terms.
      In the presence of such a term the Lagrangian density may fail to satisfy our assumptions on
      three counts. First of all since the Lagrangian density is not gauge invariant, it may not be
      invariant under the symmetries of AdS2 ×S D−2 when evaluated in the near horizon background

                                                             29
        (2.4.3). Second, since the lagrangian density may now depend explicitly on the gauge fields
        and not just their field strengths, the equations of motion of the gauge fields may no longer be
        of the form (2.2.5). Finally, if the Chern-Simons form explicitly involves Christoffel symbol or
        spin connection, then even Wald’s formula for the entropy is not directly applicable.8

  2. In some theories the gauge invariant field strength associated with an antisymmetric tensor
        field Bµ1 ...µn−1 is given by
                                            Hµ1 ...µn = ∂[µ1 Bµ2 ...µn ] + Ωµ1 ...µn                         (2.6.5)

        for some Chern-Simons n-form Ω constructed out of lower dimensional gauge fields and spin
        connection. Under the gauge transformation (2.6.1), Bµ1 ...µn−1 is assigned the transformation

                                                δBµ1 ...µn−1 = −χµ1 ...µn−1 ,                                (2.6.6)

        so that
                                                        δHµ1 ...µn = 0 .                                     (2.6.7)

        A typical example of such a term is the 3-form field strength associated with the NS sector
        2-form gauge field of heterotic string theory. The definition of the three form field strength
        involves both gauge and Lorentz Chern-Simons 3-forms. In such cases the Lagrangian density,
        being a function of Hµ1 ...µn , is invariant under the gauge transformation (2.6.1), (2.6.6). Never-
        theless, since the definition of Hµ1 ...µn involves various lower rank gauge fields and not just their
        field strengths, the presence of such terms in the Lagrangian density violates our assumptions
        on three counts. First the Bianchi identity of Hµ1 ...µn , being of the form

                                             ∂[µ1 Hµ2 ...µn+1 ] = ∂[µ1 Ωµ2 ...µn+1 ] ,                       (2.6.8)

        now could give additional constraints on the near horizon parameters besides the ones obtained
        by entropy function extremization condition. Second since the definition of Hµ1 ...µn involves
        explicitly lower rank gauge fields, the equations of motion of the gauge fields may no longer be
        of the form (2.2.5). Finally, if the Chern-Simons form explicitly involves Christoffel symbol or
        spin connection, then Wald’s formula for the entropy is not directly applicable.

In order to deal with these Chern-Simons terms we shall proceed in two steps. First we shall show
that the second type of Chern-Simons terms described above, where it appears in the definition of a
field strength, can be transformed to the first type. This will involve generalizing the analysis in [44].
  8
      For some recent work on application of Wald’s formula in the presence of Chern-Simons term see [43].

                                                            30
We shall then describe a general procedure for dealing with the first type of Chern-Simons term [45].
In carrying out these manipulations we shall need to add total derivative terms to the Lagrangian
density. Since addition of such term do not affect the equations of motion we expect that the entropy
computed from the new Lagrangian density will continue to describe entropy of extremal black holes
in the original theory.
   The first step is carried out as follows. Suppose in a theory in D dimensions we have an (n − 1)-
form field B whose field strength H contains a Chern-Simons term as in (2.6.5), but L depends on
B only through its field strength H. We now introduce a new (D − n − 1)-form field Bµ1 ...µD−n−1 and
define its field strength to be
                                          Hµ1 ...µD−n = ∂[µ1 Bµ2 ...µD−n ] .                             (2.6.9)

Hµ1 ...µD−n is invariant under a gauge transformation

                                       δBµ1 ...µD−n−1 = ∂[µ1 Λµ2 ...µD−n−1 ] .                          (2.6.10)

We now consider a new Lagrangian density
             p            p
              − det g Le = − det g L + ǫµ1 ...µD (Hµ1 ...µn − Ωµ1 ...µn ) Hµn+1 µn+2 ...µD ,            (2.6.11)

and treat Hµ1 ...µn and Bµ1 ...µD−n−1 as independent fields. In this case the equation of motion of the
Bµ1 ...µD−n−1 field gives
                                   ǫµ1 ...µD ∂µ1 (Hµ2 ...µn+1 − Ωµ2 ...µn+1 ) = 0 ,                     (2.6.12)

whose general solution is of the form (2.6.5). On the other hand the equation of motion of Hµ1 ...µn
associated with the new action has the form
                                     δS
                                              + ǫµ1 ...µD ∂µn+1 Bµn+2 ...µD = 0 .                       (2.6.13)
                                   δHµ1 ...µn

This gives
                                                        δS
                                                ∂µ1              = 0,                                   (2.6.14)
                                                      δHµ1 ...µn
which is the equation of motion of the field Bµ1 ...µn−1 in the original theory. Furthermore, the equation
                                                                         R√
of motion of any other field ψ(x) computed from the new action                 − det g Le is the same as the one
                                       R√
derived from the original action S =        − det gL. To see this note that (2.6.11) gives an equation
of motion of ψ of the form:
                                    Z
                          δS                         δΩµ1 ···µn (y)
                                 − dD yǫµ1 ···µD                    Hµn+1 ···µD (y) = 0 ,                (2.6.15)
                        δψ(x) H                         δψ(x)

                                                          31
where the subscript H denotes that we need to carry out the functional derivative treating Hµ1 ···µn
as an independent field. On the other hand the original equations of motion derived from the action
S, where we treat Bµ1 ...µn−1 as independent field, may be expressed as
                                         Z
                                δS                 δS     δΩµ1 ···µn (y)
                                       + dD y                            = 0,                           (2.6.16)
                              δψ(x) H           δHµ1···µn   δψ(x)

where we have taken into account the fact that there may be a hidden dependence of S on ψ through
the Chern-Simons form Ω in the definition of H. Using (2.6.13) one can verify that (2.6.15) and
(2.6.16) are identical. Thus (2.6.11) is classically equivalent to the original Lagrangian density and
we can use this new Lagrangian density to carry out the computation of black hole entropy in this
theory.
   Since Hµ1 ...µn is now an independent field, and since the field strength H is defined as in (2.6.9),
we see that in the new theory the definition of field strengths do not contain any Chern-Simons term.
However the last term in the Lagrangian density,

                                       − ǫµ1 ...µD Ωµ1 ...µn Hµn+1 µn+2 ...µD ,                         (2.6.17)

is a Chern-Simons term. Thus the new Lagrangian density is of type 1 where the Lagrangian density
has an explicit Chern-Simons term.
   Let us now proceed to analyze Lagrangian densities of type 1. We shall find it useful to use the
notation of differential forms rather than tensors. Chern-Simons terms which appear in string theory
Lagrangian density have one of two forms

                                           B (1) ∧ dB (2) ∧ . . . dB (s)                                (2.6.18)

or
                                       dB (1) ∧ dB (2) ∧ . . . dB (s) ∧ Ω3L                             (2.6.19)

where B (i) are ri -form fields with associated (ri − 1)-form gauge transformations as in (2.6.2), and
Ω3L is the Lorentz Chern-Simons 3-form.9 The first term is manifestly invariant under the gauge
transformations associated with the B (2) , B (3) , . . . B (s) fields, but fails to be invariant under the
gauge transformation associated with the B (1) field. However by adding a total derivative term to
the Lagrangian density we can transfer the exterior derivative from any of the other B (i) fields to B (1) .
In this case the term will be manifestly invariant under the gauge transformation associated with B (1) ,
     9
    We are assuming that the relevant rank 1 gauge fields are abelian so that their Chern-Simons terms are of the
form (2.6.18).

                                                         32
but will fail to be invariant under one of the other gauge transformations. The second term (2.6.19)
is manifestly invariant under all the B (i) gauge transformations, but fails to be invariant under the
local Lorentz transformation. Again by adding a total derivative term we can transfer the exterior
deivative from one of the B (i) ’s to the Lorentz Chern-Simons term. The resulting Lagrangian density
will be manifestly general coordinate and local Lorentz invariant since dΩ3L transforms covariantly
under these transformations, but will fail to be invariant under one of the B (i) gauge transformations.
   Our proposal for dealing with the terms given in (2.6.18) and (2.6.19) is to dimensionally reduce
the theory to two dimensions by regarding the sphere S D−2 as a compact direction, express the
resulting action as the integral of a covariant Lagrangian density in two dimensions spanned by the
r and t coordinates and then calculate its contribution to the entropy function in the usual manner.
After dimensional reduction the magnetic flux pa through S D−2 will appear as parameters labeling
the two dimensional theory. Since we are interested in only SO(D − 1) invariant field configuration,
the dimensional reduction is a straightforward process except in cases where the Lagrangian density,
evaluated in the SO(D − 1) invariant background, has a term that is not manifestly SO(D − 1)
invariant. This would happen if the Lagrangian density either contains a Lorentz Chern-Simons
term which, evaluated for the sphere metric, is not manifestly SO(D − 1) invariant, or depends
explicitly on a B (i) whose field strength dB (i) has a non-zero flux through S D−2 since in this case
B (i) itself does not remain invariant under an SO(D − 1) rotation. Our strategy will be to avoid
these terms to whatever extent possible by adding total derivative to the Lagrangian density before
dimensional reduction to transfer the derivatives in appropriate places. Thus if in (2.6.18) and/or
(2.6.19) there is even a single B (i) which does not have an associated flux through S D−2 , we can take
the Lagrangian density in a form where that particular B (i) appears without a derivative, and every
other factor has a manifestly covariant form. In this case the Lagrangian density evaluated for a
generic SO(D − 1) invariant background will have a manifestly SO(D − 1) invariant form. Thus the
only cases where the dimensional reduction is complicated is the one where all the B (i) ’s have flux
through S D−2 . This requires all the B (i) ’s appearing in (2.6.18) and/or (2.6.19) to be (D − 3)-form
so that their field strengths are (D − 2)-forms. Since the Lagrangian density must be a D-form, for
(2.6.18) this gives
                                                                   D+1
                              s(D − 2) − 1 = D         ı.e.   s=       .                        (2.6.20)
                                                                   D−2
On the other hand for (2.6.19) this gives

                                                                   D−3
                              s(D − 2) + 3 = D         ı.e.   s=       .                        (2.6.21)
                                                                   D−2


                                                  33
  First let us deal with the case (2.6.20). Since s must be an integer, the only possible cases are
D = 3, s = 4 and D = 5, s = 2. For simplicity we shall explain how to deal with the second case; the
analysis of the first case will proceed in an identical manner. The relevant term in the Lagrangian
density is proportional to
                                             B (1) ∧ dB (2) ,                               (2.6.22)

where B (1) and B (2) are 2-form fields. Note that B (1) and B (2) must be different fields since B ∧ dB
is a total derivative for any even form field B. Suppose dB (1) and dB (2) have flux p1 and p2 through
S 3 . We now define new 2-form fields
                                  p2 B (1) − p1 B (2)                    p1 B (1) + p2 B (2)
                        C (1) =      p                ,        C (2) =      p                .   (2.6.23)
                                         p21 + p22                              p21 + p22

In terms of these fields (2.6.22) can be wrtten as

                                                  C (1) ∧ dC (2)                                 (2.6.24)

plus total derivative terms. Furthermore the field C (1) has no flux through S 3 and C (2) has a flux
                p
proportional to p21 + p22 . Since the Lagrangian density does not involve C (2) explicitly, we can carry
out the dimensional reduction of this term in a straightforward fashion, and get a term proportional
to                                              q
                                                    p21 + p22 C (1) ,                            (2.6.25)

in the two dimensional theory. Since the 2-form field C (1) can be regarded as a scalar field density in
the two dimensional theory, (2.6.25) has a manifestly covariant form in two dimensions and we can
use entropy function formalism to analyze extremal black hole solutions in this theory.
   We note in passing that (2.6.25) is the only term in the two dimensional Lagrangian density which
depends explicitly on C (1) ; the rest of the Lagrangian density depends on C (1) through dC (1) and
hence vanishes in two dimensions. Requiring the action to be stationary with respect to C (1) then
gives p1 = p2 = 0. This shows that in the presence of a term of the form (2.6.22) we cannot have an
extremal black hole solution with magnetic charges associated with the B (1) and B (2) fields.
   We now turn to a discussion of terms of the form (2.6.19) for which the only problematic case
is (2.6.21). Requiring s to be integer gives s = 0, D = 3 as the only case. This corresponds to the
presence of a gravitational Chern-Simons term in the three dimensional theory [46, 47]:
                                                                          
                        p          (3)       µντ 1 b ρ        1 bρ bσ bη
                           − det gLCS = K ǫ             b σ
                                                   Γ ∂ν Γτ ρ + Γµσ Γνη Γτ ρ ,              (2.6.26)
                                                  2 µσ        3


                                                          34
      bµνρ denotes the Christoffel symbol and K is a constant. To deal with this term, we regard the
where Γ
horizon S 1 as a compact direction and carry out the dimensional reduction of this term by taking
the ansatz:                              h                           i
                                 µ   ν     (2)  α  β             α 2
                            gµν dx dx = φ gαβ dx dx + (dy + aα dx ) .                           (2.6.27)
       (2)
Here gαβ (0 ≤ α, β ≤ 1) denotes a two dimensional metric, aα denotes a two dimensional gauge
field and φ denotes a two dimensional scalar field. The y coordinate labeling the horizon S 1 is taken
to have period 2π. In terms of these two dimensional fields the lagrangian density (2.6.26), after
dimensional reduction to two dimensions by integration over the y coordinate, takes the form [48,45]:
                                                                 
                                    1 (2) αβ       1 αβ      γδ
                              Kπ      R ε fαβ + ε fαγ f fδβ ,                               (2.6.28)
                                    2              2

plus total derivative terms. Here fαβ = ∂α aβ − ∂β aα is the field strength associated with the two
dimensional gauge field aα , R(2) denotes the Ricci scalar constructed out of the two dimensional metric
 (2)
gαβ and εαβ is the totally anti-symmetric symbol with ǫ01 = 1. Since the Lagrangian density (2.6.28)
has a manifestly covariant form in two dimensions, we can apply the entropy function formalism on
this lagrangian density. This will be illustrated in more detail in the context of BTZ black holes in
§3.4.
   This concludes our discussion on Chern-Simons terms in the context of spherically symmetric
black holes in arbitrary dimensions. A similar analysis may be carried out for rotating black holes,
but we shall not discuss this case here.


3     Explicit Computation of Black Hole Entropy
In this section we shall illustrate the entropy function formalism of §2 by using it to calculate the
entropy of extremal black holes in a variety of theories. Many of these results can also be derived from
other methods; in each of these cases the result obtained using entropy function method (naturally)
agrees with the ones obtained by other methods. The analysis of this section will serve the twin
purpose of illustrating the entropy function formalism and deriving specific results for black hole
entropy which will later be compared with the statistical entropy in §5.

3.1    Black holes in N = 4 supersymmetric theories in D = 4
There are various string compactifications which lead to N = 4 supersymmetric theories in four
dimensions. These theories have many scalar fields, known as moduli fields, whose potential vanishes

                                                  35
identically by the requirement of supersymmetry. Thus they can take arbitrary vacuum expectation
values (vev), and the space of vev of these scalar fields describe the moduli space. At a generic point
in the moduli space the requirement of N = 4 supersymmetry completely determines the massless
field content of the theory in terms of a single integer r ≥ 6 which labels the number of U(1) gauge
fields in the theory. In particular the massless bosonic fields are the string metric Gµν , r abelian
              (i)
gauge fields Aµ (i = 1, . . . r), a complex scalar field a + iS taking value in the upper half plane, and
a set of r × r matrix valued scalar fields M subject to the constraint:

                                      MLM T = L,        MT = M ,                                  (3.1.1)

where L is a matrix with 6 eigenvalues +1 and (r − 6) eigenvalues −1. For r ≥ 12, a convenient
choice of L is                                         
                                         06 I6
                                   L =  I6 06          ,                              (3.1.2)
                                                 −Ir−12
where Ik denotes a k × k identity matrix and 0k denote k × k zero matrix. The canonical metric gµν
is related to the string metric Gµν via the relation Gµν = Sgµν .
   Our analysis in this section will mostly follow [4, 8].

3.1.1     Supergravity approximation

Requirement of N = 4 supersymmetry also fixes all the terms in the action containing at most two
derivatives. The part of the action containing the massless bosonic fields is given by
                  Z                  
             1         √                      1                  1         1
   S =          ′
                    d x − det G S RG + 2 Gµν (∂µ S∂ν S − ∂µ a∂ν a) + Gµν T r(∂µ ML∂ν ML)
                     4
            2πα                               S                  2         8
                                             a                         i
                                      (j)                        (j)
                                                           Lij Feµ′ ν ′ .
                  ′  ′                           ′   ′
            −Gµµ Gνν Fµν(i)
                            (LML)ij Fµ′ ν ′ − Gµµ Gνν Fµν
                                                       (i)
                                                                                       (3.1.3)
                                             S
                                                                            (i)
Note that this action has an SO(6, r − 6) symmetry acting on M and Fµν :

                                   M → ΩMΩT ,        (i)
                                                    Fµν         (j)
                                                         → Ωij Fµν  ,                             (3.1.4)

where Ω is an r × r matrix satisfying
                                              ΩT LΩ = L .                                         (3.1.5)

This corresponds to the continuous T-duality symmetry of the supergravity action. As will be
discussed in §3.1.3, an appropriate discrete subgroup of this is an exact symmetry of the full string
theory.

                                                   36
    In this theory we look for a spherically symmetric extremal black hole solution carrying arbitrary
electric charges qi and magnetic charges pi for i = 1, · · · r. Following the analysis of §2.2 we look for
a near horizon field configuration of the form:
                                                   
                             α′                dr 2      α′
                      ds = v1 −r dt + 2 + v2 (dθ2 + sin2 θ dφ2 ) ,
                        2              2 2
                            16                 r        16
                                        S = uS ,       a = ua ,    Mij = uM ij
                                                  √                 √
                                           (i)      α′       (i)  pi α ′
                                         Frt =         ei , Fθφ =        sin θ ,                                      (3.1.6)
                                                    4              16π
where, for later convenience, we have included additional factors of α′ /16 multiplying v1 and v2 and
                     √
additional factors of α′ /4 multiplying ei and pi .10 The effect of this will be to change the definition
of the electric and magnetic charges. Eq.(3.1.6) agrees with the corresponding equations in [4] for
α′ = 16. Substituting (3.1.6) into (3.1.3) and using (2.2.3) we get
                                           Z
                                                 √
           f (uS , ua , uM , ~v , ~e, ~p) ≡ dθdφ − det G L
                                                                                                      
           1                  2         2    2                 1                      ua
        =     v1 v2 uS − +                + ei (LuM L)ij ej − 2 2 pi (LuM L)ij pj +           ei Lij pj .
           8                v1 v2 v12                        8π v2                  πuS v1 v2
                                                                                                         (3.1.7)

Eq.(2.2.9) now gives

              E(uS , ua, uM , ~v, ~e, ~q, ~p) ≡ 2π (ei qi − f (uS , ua , uM , ~v , ~e, ~p))
                                                                        n
                                                             1                  2         2     2
                                              = 2π ei qi − v1 v2 uS −                +      + 2 ei (LuM L)ij ej
                                                             8                  v1 v2 v1
                                                           1                                ua              o
                                                     − 2 2 pi (LuM L)ij pj +                       ei Lij pj .        (3.1.8)
                                                        8π v2                            πuS v1 v2
Eliminating ei from (3.1.8) using the equation ∂E/∂ei = 0 we get:
                                        hu                  v1 T             v1
                                           S
      E(uS , ua , uM , ~v, ~q, ~p) = 2π      (v2 − v1 ) +        q uM q +            (u2 + u2a )pT LuM Lp
                                          4                v2 uS          64π 2 v2 uS S
                                          v1                  i
                                     −           ua q T uM Lp .                                          (3.1.9)
                                       4πv2 uS
We can simplify the formulæ by defining new charge vectors:
                                                                       1
                                             Qi = 2qi ,        Pi =      Lij pj .                                    (3.1.10)
                                                                      4π
  10
      We shall use the convention that the coordinates r, t, θ, φ and all the scalar fields are dimensionless, the gauge fields
have dimension of length and the metric has dimension of length2 . With this convention the near horizon parameters
v1 , v2 , ua , uS , uMij , ei and pj are dimensionless.

                                                              37
            ~ and P~ the entropy function E is given by:
In terms of Q
             πh                 v1                                                 i
        E=     uS (v2 − v1 ) +       QT uM Q + (u2S + u2a ) P T uM P − 2 ua QT uM P .              (3.1.11)
             2                 v2 uS
   We now need to find the extremum of E with respect to uS , ua , uM ij , v1 and v2 . In general this
leads to a complicated set of equations. However we can simplify the analysis by noting that (3.1.4)
induces the following transformation on the various parameters:

                               ei → Ωij ej ,      pi → Ωij pj ,       uM → ΩuM ΩT ,
                    qi → (ΩT )−1
                              ij qj ,        Qi → (ΩT )−1
                                                       ij Qj ,       Pi → (ΩT )−1
                                                                               ij Pj .             (3.1.12)

The entropy function (3.1.11) is invariant under these transformations. Since at its extremum with
respect to uM ij the entropy function depends only on P~ , Q,
                                                           ~ v1 , v2 , uS and ua it must be a function
of the SO(6, r − 6) invariant combinations:

                          Q2 = Qi Lij Qj ,     P 2 = Pi Lij Pj ,   Q · P = Qi Lij Pj ,             (3.1.13)

besides v1 , v2 , uS and ua . Let us for definiteness take Q2 > 0, P 2 > 0, and (Q · P )2 < Q2 P 2 . In that
case with the help of an SO(6, r − 6) transformation we can make

                                  (Ir − L)ij Qj = 0,       (Ir − L)ij Pj = 0 ,                     (3.1.14)

where
            the r × r identity matrix. This is most easily seen by diagonalizing L to the form
      Ir denotes
  I6                        ~ and P~ satisfying (3.1.14) will have
             . In this case Q
      −Ir−6

                                    Qi = 0,      Pi = 0,     for 7 ≤ i ≤ r .                       (3.1.15)

We shall now show that for P~ and Q
                                  ~ satisfying this condition, every term in (3.1.11) is extremized
with respect to uM for
                                                   uM = Ir .                                       (3.1.16)
Clearly a variation δuM ij with either i or j in the range [7, r] will give vanishing contribution to
each term in δE computed from (3.1.11). On the other hand due to the constraint (3.1.1) on M,
any variation δMij (and hence δuM ij ) with 1 ≤ i, j ≤ 6 must vanish, since in this subspace (3.1.1)
requires M to be both symmetric and orthogonal. Thus each term in δE vanishes under all the
allowed variations of uM .
    (3.1.16) is not the only possible value of uM that extremizes E. Any uM related to (3.1.16) by
an SO(6, r − 6) transformation that preserves the vectors Q ~ and P~ will extremize E. Thus there is

                                                       38
a family of extrema representing flat directions of E. However as we have argued in §2.3, the value
of the entropy is independent of the choice of uM .
   We note in passing that the entropy function (3.1.11) is also invariant under continuous S-duality
transformation
          ′              
            Q        m n        Q                  m(ua + iuS ) + n           uS
              ′ =                   , u′a + iu′S =                    , vi′ = ′ vi ,         (3.1.17)
            P        r s        P                   r(ua + iuS ) + s          uS
where m, n, r, s are real numbers satisfying ms − nr = 1. This is a reflection of the continuous
S-duality covariance of the equations of motion derived from the action (3.1.3). We shall not make
use of this symmetry in our analysis. However a discrete subgroup of this, to be introduced in §3.1.3,
is an exact symmetry of string theory and will play an important role in our analysis.
    Substituting (3.1.16) into (3.1.11) and using (3.1.13), (3.1.14), we get:
                                                                             
                        π                    v1 Q2 P 2 2         2     ua
                   E=        uS (v2 − v1 ) +       +    (u + ua ) − 2      Q·P    .               (3.1.18)
                        2                    v2 uS   uS S              uS
Note that we have expressed the right hand side of this equation in an SO(2, 2) invariant form.
Written in this manner, eq.(3.1.18) is valid for general P~ , Q
                                                              ~ satisfying

                                 P 2 > 0,   Q2 > 0,        (Q · P )2 < Q2 P 2 .                   (3.1.19)

   It remains to extremize E with respect to v1 , v2 , uS and ua . Extremization with respect to v1
and v2 give:
                                                                          
                           v1 = v2 = u−2
                                      S  Q2 + P 2 (u2S + u2a ) − 2ua Q · P .                      (3.1.20)
Substituting this into (3.1.18) gives:
                                  π 1  2
                             E=        Q − 2 ua Q · P + P 2 (u2S + u2a ) .                        (3.1.21)
                                  2 uS
Finally extremizing this with respect to ua , uS we get
                         p
                           Q2 P 2 − (Q · P )2           Q·P
                  uS =             2
                                              ,   ua =      ,              v1 = v2 = 2P 2 .       (3.1.22)
                                 P                       P2
The black hole entropy, given by the value of E for this configuration, is
                                            p
                                   SBH = π Q2 P 2 − (Q · P )2 .                                   (3.1.23)

   Although this formula has been derived under the condition P 2 > 0, Q2 > 0, P 2Q2 > (Q · P )2 ,
the final result for the entropy also holds for arbitrary P 2 , Q2 as long as P 2 Q2 > (Q · P )2 . Extremal

                                                      39
black holes with P 2 Q2 > (Q · P )2 are known to be supersymmetric although we cannot see this in
our analysis. The entropy function formalism also allows us to calculate the entropy of extremal
black holes with P 2 Q2 < (Q · P )2. We shall not go through the analysis here, but just quote the final
result:
                                               p
                                     SBH = π (Q · P )2 − Q2 P 2 .                               (3.1.24)

3.1.2   A special class of N = 4 supersymmetric string theories

Our goal is to study the effect of higher derivative terms in the action on the entropy function.
However, unlike in the case of two derivative terms, the higher derivative corrections do depend on
the details of the string compactification that gives rise to the theory. Thus in order to study the effect
of higher derivative corrections we need to consider specific theories. We shall restrict our analysis
to a class of string theories where we begin with type IIB string theory on M × Se1 × S 1 where M is
either K3 or T 4 and Se1 and S 1 are two circles, and take an orbifold of this theory by a ZZN symmetry
group. The generator g of the ZZN group involves 1/N unit of shift along the circle S 1 together with
an order N transformation eg in M. e
                                   g is chosen so that it commutes with the N = 4 supersymmetry
generators of the parent theory. Thus the final theory has N = 4 supersymmetry. Various properties
of ge coming from this requirement have been discussed in appendix B. In particular this requires
M/e  g to be an orbifold of SU(2) holonomy.
   The description of the theory given above will be referred to as the first description of the theory.
Another useful description is obtained by making an S-duality transformation in the type IIB theory
on M × Se1 × S 1 that exchanges the NS 5-branes with D5-branes and fundamental strings with
D-strings, followed by an R → 1/R duality on the circle Se1 that takes type IIB theory on Se1 to
type IIA theory on the dual circle Sb1 , and then using six dimensional string-string duality to relate
this to a heterotic string theory on T 4 × Sb1 × S 1 for M = K3 [49, 50, 51, 52, 53] and type IIA string
theory on T 4 × Sb1 × S 1 for M = T 4 [54]. Under this duality the transformation e  g gets mapped to a
transformation bg that acts only as a shift on the right-moving degrees of freedom on the world-sheet
and as a shift plus rotation on the left-moving degrees of freedom. In the final theory, obtained by
taking the orbifold of heterotic or type IIA string theory on T 4 × Sb1 × S 1 by a 1/N unit of shift
along S 1 together with the transformation b
                                           g , all the space-time supersymmetries come from the
right-moving sector of the world-sheet. We shall call this the second description of the theory.
    The heterotic models were first discovered in the analysis of [55,56,57,58,59]. The type II versions
were analyzed in [54].
   At the level of two derivative terms, the effective action of each of these theories is given by (3.1.3)


                                                    40
for appropriate choice of r determined from the details of compactification. The precise expression
for r is given by
                                              r = 2k +8,                                        (3.1.25)

where k has been computed in appendix C (eq.(C.17)) and is equal to half the number of e g invariant
harmonic (1, 1) forms on M. Explicit form of k for special cases can be found in (C.36), (C.38).
   In order to facilitate later analysis where we compare the black hole entropy with the statistical
entropy, it will be useful to know the correspondence between the various fields and charges appearing
in (3.1.3) with the physical fields and charges in string theory. First of all the field τ = a + iS
corresponds to the complex structure modulus of the torus Se1 × S 1 in the first description. By
following the duality chain carefully one can see that it represents the usual axion-dilaton field in the
second description, – a being the scalar field obtained by dualizing the anti-symmetric tensor field
in the NSNS sector, and S being e−2Φ where Φ denotes the dilaton field. The matrix valued scalar
field M encodes information about the shape and size of the compact space T 4 × Sb1 × S 1 and the
components of the NSNS sector 2-form field along T 4 × Sb1 × S 1 in the second description. Finally
in the second description the gauge fields appearing in the action (3.1.3) can be related directly to
the ones coming from the dimensional reduction of the ten dimensional metric, NSNS sector anti-
symmetric tensor field and gauge fields, without any further electric-magnetic duality transformation.
As a result the elementary string states in this description carry electric charge vector Q ~ and the
various solitons carry magnetic charge vector P~ . We shall carry on the rest of the discussion in this
section in the second description, but following the chain of dualities relating the two descriptions
one can easily work out the interpretation of various quantities in the first description.
    Let x4 and x5 denote the coordinates along Sb1 and S 1 respectively, both normalized to have
          √
period 2π α′ after the ZZN orbifolding, and let xµ (0 ≤ µ ≤ 3) denote the non-compact coordinates.
For most of our analysis it will be useful to study in detail a subsector of the theory in which we
include only those gauge fields which are associated with the 4µ and 5µ components of the metric
and the anti-symmetric tensor field, only those components of M which encode information about
the components of the metric and the anti-symmetric tensor field along Sb1 × S 1 , the axion-dilaton
                                                                                          (i)
field, and the four dimensional metric. In this subsector there are four gauge fields Aµ (1 ≤ i ≤ 4)
and a 4 × 4 matrix valued field M satisfying
                                                                     
                              T                T                0 I2
                            M = M, MLM = L, L ≡                          .                   (3.1.26)
                                                               I2 0
             (i)
The fields Aµ and M are related to the ten dimensional string metric GM N and 2-form field BM N

                                                   41
via the relations [60, 61]:

                           bmn ≡ G(10)
                           G           , B  bmn ≡ Bmn(10)
                                                          ,   m, n = 4, 5 ,
                                  mn−1                     
                                    Gb          b −1
                                                G B
                           M=        b b −1  b    bGb−1 B b
                                   −B G      G−B
                                     1 b−1 mn (10)                1 (10) b
                           Aµ(m−3) = (G     ) Gmµ , Aµ(m−1) = Bmµ        − Bmn Aµ(m−3) ,
                                     2                            2
                                4 ≤ m, n ≤ 5, 0 ≤ µ, ν ≤ 3 .                                               (3.1.27)

The Lagrangian density involving the axion-dilaton field, the four gauge fields and the 4 × 4 matrix
valued scalar field M has a form identical to the one given in (3.1.3) with L given as in (3.1.26). In
fact this is a consistent truncation of the full N = 4 supergravity theory.
    With the normalization convention we have used for the charges P~ and Q, ~ and the sign conventions
described in appendix A, a state with n b unit of momentum and −w   b unit of winding along Sb1 , n′ unit
of momentum and −w ′ unit of winding along S 1 , N   b unit of Kaluza-Klein monopole charge [62, 63]
associated with Sb1 , −W
                       c unit of NS 5-brane wrapped along T 4 ×S 1 , N ′ unit of Kaluza-Klein monopole
charge associated with S 1 and W ′ unit of NS 5-brane wrapped along T 4 × Sb1 describes a four
dimensional charge vector of the form11
                                                       
                                        n
                                        b              c
                                                       W
                                       n′          W′ 
                                  Q= w
                                           ,    P =     
                                                        b .                           (3.1.28)
                                        b           N
                                        w′             N′

Thus we have

  Q2 = 2(b
         nwb + n′ w ′ ),               bW
                               P 2 = 2(N c + N ′ W ′ ),             bn
                                                               P ·Q=N   cw
                                                                      b+W b + N ′ n′ + W ′ w ′ .           (3.1.29)

We shall denote by V the subspace spanned by charge vectors of the form (3.1.28).
     The sign conventions for various charges have been described in detail in appendix A. Here we
shall say a few words about the normalization of the various charges appearing in (3.1.28). First of
                                                                  √
all units of momentum along S 1 and Sb1 will be taken to be 1/ α′. We take Sb1 to have coordinate
           √                                        √
radius 2π α′ and S 1 to have coordinate radius 2π α′ N before orbifolding. Thus after orbifolding
                                  √
S 1 / ZZN has coordinate radius 2π α′ , and various fields satisfy b
                                                                   g twisted boundary condition under
  11
     A Kaluza-Klein monopole associated with a circle denotes a Taub-NUT space whose asymptotic geometry is the
product of this circle and the three non-compact spatial directions. Also an NS 5-brane wrapped along T 4 × S 1 will
be said to carry one unit of H-monopole charge associated with Sb1 and an NS 5-brane wrapped along T 4 × Sb1 will be
said to carry −1 unit of H-monopole charge associated with S 1 [64].


                                                        42
                   √
a translation by 2π α′ along S 1 . As a result the momentum along S 1 is quantized in units of
     √
1/(N α′ ). Similar conventions are followed for all other quantum numbers. One unit of winding
along S 1 will refer to a state such that as we go once around the string, its coordinate along S 1
            √
shifts by 2π α′ . This represents a twisted sector state. An untwisted sector state whose coordinate
                                     √
along S 1 changes by multiples of 2π α′ N will carry winding charge w ′ in multiples of N. A single
H-monopole associated with S 1 , with W ′ = 1, will correspond to an array of NS 5-branes wrapped
                                            √
on Sb1 × T 4 and placed at intervals of 2π α′ along S 1 . Finally the original Kaluza-Klein monopole
                                                                             √
represented by a Taub-NUT space with an asymptotic circle of radius N α′ , after the orbifolding,
will develop a ZZN singularity at its centre and has to be regarded as carrying N units of Kaluza-Klein
monopole charge associated with S 1 . Thus the Kaluza-Klein monopole charge N ′ will be quantized
in units of N. The charges n
                           b, w,
                              b N b and W c are all quantized in integer units since Sb1 has period
   √
2π α′ and the orbifold group does not act on Sb1 . Similar convention must also be followed in the
definition of various fields. For example in defining the matrix valued field M and the gauge fields
  (i)                                                                                        √
Aµ via eq.(3.1.27), the coordinates x4 and x5 must be chosen so that x4 has period 2π α′ and x5
               √
has period 2π α′ N before orbifolding.
     We must also follow the same convention in identifying fields in the first description. For example
if the physical radii of S 1 and Se1 are R0 and R
                                                e before orbifolding, then the field τ = a + iS has to
be regarded as the complex structure modulus of the torus Se1 × S 1 with S 1 direction regarded as
                                              √
having period 2πR0 /N. Thus we shall have a2 + S 2 = R0 /(N R),    e and tan−1 (a/S) will be given by
the angle between the two circles.

3.1.3   Duality symmetries

The N = 4 supersymmetric string theories discussed here have T- and S-duality symmetries induced
from the duality symmetries of the parent theory before orbifolding. Since classification of duality
symmetries into T- and S-dualities depends on the description of the system we are using, we shall
follow the convention that unless mentioned otherwise, whenever we refer to T- or S-duality symmetry
of the theory we shall imply T- or S-duality symmetry in the second description. Similarly whenever
we mention electric or magnetic charges we shall imply electric or magnetic charges in the second
description. With this convention a general T-duality transformation acts non-trivially on the charges
and the matrix valued scalar field M as:

                          M → ΩMΩT ,       Q → (ΩT )−1 Q,    P → (ΩT )−1 P ,                    (3.1.30)




                                                  43
where Ω is an r × r matrix that preserves the charge lattice and satisfies

                                              ΩLΩT = L ,                                        (3.1.31)

L being a matrix with 6 eigenvalues +1 and (r − 6) eigenvalues −1. Since L2 = 1 it follows from
(3.1.31) that ΩT LΩ = L.
    Since much of our analysis will involve states with electric and magnetic charges of the form given
in (3.1.28), we shall explicitly determine the part of the T-duality group that acts on this subspace.
This is the T-duality group associated with the torus Sb1 ×S 1 in the second description. Before taking
the ZZN orbifold this T-duality group was SL(2, ZZ) × SL(2, ZZ). Taking the orbifold preserves a
subgroup of this group which commutes with the orbifold action, ı.e. commutes with translation by
  √                                     √           √
2π α′ along S 1 up to translations by 2π α′ N and 2π α′ along S 1 and Sb1 respectively. This turns
out    isomorphic to the group Γ1 (N) × Γ1 (N) where Γ1 (N) consists of 2 × 2 matrices of the form
 to be
  a b
        satisfying
  c d

                        ad − bc = 1,    a, d ∈ N ZZ + 1,   b ∈ ZZ,c ∈ N ZZ .               (3.1.32)
                                                                                   
                                                                    a b           p q
The matrix Ω is expressed in terms of the pair of Γ1 (N) matrices           and         as
                                                                    c d           r s
                                                                    
                                    d −c 0 0             p 0 0 −q
                                  −b a 0 0   0 p q 0 
                       (ΩT )−1 = 
                                  0
                                                                     .                  (3.1.33)
                                          0 a b 0 r s 0 
                                    0     0 c d          −r 0 0 s

It is straightforward to verify that this matrix satisfies (3.1.31) and preserves the charge quantization
laws described below (3.1.29).
   If in the second description the theory is an asymmetric orbifold of heterotic string theory then
there is an additional ZZ2 duality symmetry represented by the matrix
                                                     
                                            0 0 1 0
                                         0 1 0 0
                                                     
                                         1 0 0 0 .                                         (3.1.34)
                                            0 0 0 1

Physically this represents the effect of R → 1/R duality on the circle Sb1 .
    The S-duality symmetry of the theory is best described in the first description where it corresponds
to the global diffeomorphism symmetry associated with the torus Se1 × S 1 . Before orbifolding this

                                                   44
symmetry is SL(2, ZZ). However only those elements of SL(2, ZZ) which commute with the orbifold
group generator g are true  symmetries
                                    of the theory. This again gives rise to the group Γ1 (N)
                               α β
consisting of 2 × 2 matrices         satisfying the constraints:
                               γ δ

                        αδ − βγ = 1,      α, δ ∈ N ZZ + 1,      β ∈ ZZ,       γ ∈ N ZZ .       (3.1.35)

Its action on the axion-dilaton modulus τ = a + iS and the charges is given by
                                                            
                                 ατ + β        Q        α β      Q
                            τ→          ,          →                   .                       (3.1.36)
                                 γτ + δ        P        γ   δ    P

The entropy function (3.1.18) obtained in the leading supergravity approximation is invariant under
both these symmetries.

3.1.4   Corrections due to Gauss-Bonnet terms

In the first description of the theory the axion-dilaton field τ = a + iS has the interpretation of the
complex structure modulus of the torus Se1 × S 1 . As discussed in appendix H, one loop effective
action in this theory contains a term of the form [65, 66]:
                                           Z      p
                                     ∆S = d4 x − det g ∆L ,                                    (3.1.37)

where
                                        
                            ∆L = φ(a, S) Rµνρσ Rµνρσ − 4Rµν Rµν + R2 .                         (3.1.38)

Here Rµνρσ is the Riemann tensor constructed from the canonical metric gµν :

                                                gµν = S Gµν .                                  (3.1.39)

The function φ(a, S) appearing in (3.1.38) was originally computed in [8] using the formalism devel-
oped in [67]. This calculation has been reproduced in appendix H and the result is
                         1
         φ(a, S) = −         ((k + 2) ln S + ln g(a + iS) + ln g(−a + iS)) + constant ,        (3.1.40)
                       64π 2
where, as mentioned below (3.1.25), k is equal to half the number of e
                                                                     g invariant harmonic (1,1) forms
on M, and g(τ ), computed in (C.27), is given by:
                                               ∞ N
                                               Y Y −1
                                       2πib
                                          ατ
                                                                              sr
                              g(τ ) = e                  1 − e2πir/N e2πinτ         .          (3.1.41)
                                               n=1 r=0


                                                     45
Here sr counts the number of harmonic p-forms of M with e   g eigenvalue e2πir/N weighted by (−1)p
    b, given in (C.20), is the Euler character of M divided by 24. Thus we have
and α
                                          n
                                            1 for M = K3
                                      α
                                      b=                     .                             (3.1.42)
                                            0 for M = T 4
Since in the second description of the theory M = K3 corresponds to an orbifold of heterotic string
theory on T 4 × Sb1 ×S 1 and M = T 4 corresponds to an orbifold of type II string theory on T 4 × Sb1 ×S 1 ,
we see that in this description              
                                                 1 for heterotic
                                        α
                                        b=                       .                                 (3.1.43)
                                                 0 for type II
For special cases explicit expressions for g(τ ) in terms of Dedekind eta function can be found in in
(C.35), (C.37).
   As shown in (C.34), under a duality transformation g(τ ) transforms as

                               g((aτ + b)(cτ + d)−1 ) = (cτ + d)k+2 g(τ ) .                        (3.1.44)

Using this one can show that φ(a, S) is manifestly invariant under the S-duality transformation
(3.1.36). Since a and S do not transform under a T-duality transformation of the form given in
(3.1.4), this shows that (3.1.38) is invariant under both S- and T-duality transformations. Note that
without the ln S term in its definition, φ(a, S) would not have been S-duality invariant. This is the
only term in φ(a, S) that cannot be written as a sum of a holomorphic and an anti-holomorphic term,
and has been called the holomorphic anomaly [68, 69, 70].
    The effect of this additional term (3.1.38) in the Lagrangian density gives correction to the entropy
of the black hole. This correction was first studied in [71] using an Euclidean action formalism; here we
describe a systematic method for calculating this correction using the entropy function formalism.
Using the definition of the entropy function it is easy to calculate the correction to the entropy
function due to this additional term. It is given by
                                    Z         p
                         ∆E = −2π      dθdφ − det g ∆L = 64π 2 φ(ua , uS ) .               (3.1.45)

Together with (3.1.11) this gives
                           πh                  v1  T
                   E =        uS (v2 − v1 ) +       Q uM Q + (u2S + u2a ) P T uM P
                           2                  v2 uS
                                                            i
                           −2 ua QT uM P + 128 π φ(ua , uS ) .                                     (3.1.46)



                                                     46
Since the extra term is independent of uM , v1 and v2 , the extremization of E with respect to these
variables can be carried out as before without any change. This gives, for P 2 > 0, Q2 > 0, P 2 Q2 >
(Q · P )2 ,
                      πh 1  2                                                  i
                   E=         Q − 2 ua Q · P + P 2 (u2S + u2a ) + 128πφ(ua, uS ) .        (3.1.47)
                       2 uS
The values of ua and uS at the horizon are determined by extremizing E with respect to ua and uS .
This gives:
                                                                     ∂φ
                                            P 2 ua − Q · P + 64 π uS     = 0,
                                                                     ∂ua
                        1                                            ∂φ
                      − 2    Q2 − 2 ua Q · P + P 2 u2a + P 2 + 128 π     = 0.                    (3.1.48)
                       uS                                            ∂uS
Finally the value of E evaluated at the solution to eqs.(3.1.48) gives the entropy of the black hole.
As mentioned earlier, these black holes are expected to be supersymmetric. Eqs.(3.1.47), (3.1.48)
first appeared in [72] in the context of N = 2 supergravity theories.
    Although it is difficult to solve the extremization equations (3.1.48) analytically, we can solve
it iteratively. In particular, at the level of four derivative terms in the action, we are interested in
corrections to the entropy which are suppressed compared to the leading contribution (3.1.23) by
two powers of various charges, ı.e. terms which remain invariant under a simultaneous rescaling of
all the charges. For this we can simply evaluate the modified entropy function at the leading order
solution (3.1.22) for uS and ua . This gives the following expression for the black hole entropy:
                                                           p                      !
                    p                              Q·P       Q2 P 2 −  (Q · P ) 2
          SBH = π Q2 P 2 − (Q · P )2 + 64 π 2 φ          ,                          +···       (3.1.49)
                                                     P2             P2

where · · · denote correction terms which are suppressed by inverse powers of charges.
   Although (3.1.49) give the correction to the black hole entropy due to the Gauss-Bonnet term,
we should note that the effective action of string theory contains other four derivative terms besides
the Gauss-Bonnet term. In principle their contribution to the entropy will be of the same order
as that of the Gauss-Bonnet term. Thus one could question the significance of the result given in
(3.1.49). At present there is no completely satisfactory answer to this question, but we shall try to
summarize our current understanding of the situation. In order to set up the background for this
analysis we shall first study (3.1.47), (3.1.48) in a particular limit. Let us consider a range of charges
where the electric charge Q  ~ is much larger than the magnetic charge P~ . In this case the leading
order result (3.1.22) shows that uS is large at the horizon and hence the string loop corrections in the
second description, involving inverse powers of uS , should be small. Thus we can expect that in the

                                                   47
second description we only need to include corrections to the effective action at string tree level. In
the particular context of the Gauss-Bonnet term, this corresponds to replacing φ(ua , uS ) in (3.1.47),
(3.1.48) by its expression for large uS . Using (3.1.40), (3.1.41) we see that for large uS
                                                         1
                                          φ(ua , uS ) ≃     α
                                                            b uS .                          (3.1.50)
                                                        16π
Substituting this in (3.1.47) we get
                             πh 1                                              i
                        E=           Q2 − 2 ua Q · P + P 2 (u2S + u2a ) + 8 α
                                                                            b uS .          (3.1.51)
                             2 uS
Extremization of this function with respect to uS and ua can now be carried out analytically and,
using (3.1.20), yields the answer
                                      s
                                          Q2 P 2 − (Q · P )2             Q·P
                               uS =                          ,    ua =       ,
                                           P 2 (P 2 + 8b
                                                       α)                 P2
                               v1 = v2 = 2P 2 + 8b
                                                 α,                                             (3.1.52)

and                                         r
                                           (P 2 + 8b
                                                   α)(Q2 P 2 − (Q · P )2)
                            SBH = E = π                                   .                 (3.1.53)
                                                        P2
   For later use in §3.2.2 and §4.2 we shall write down the solution (3.1.52) for a special class of
black holes for which                                       
                                         n
                                         b                   0
                                      0               W′ 
                                  Q= w
                                           ,       P = 
                                                         0 .
                                                                                           (3.1.54)
                                         b
                                         0                  N′
For definiteness we shall take
                                       N ′ , W ′ > 0,     n
                                                          b, w
                                                             b < 0,                             (3.1.55)
so that (3.1.19) is satisfied. Let us further assume that n
                                                          bwb >> N ′ W ′ so that uS at the horizon is
large and hence φ(ua, uS ) can be approximated as in (3.1.50). In this case (3.1.52), (3.1.53) take the
form:
                                         r
                                                n
                                                bw b
                                    uS =      ′  ′
                                                         ,      ua = 0 ,
                                            N W + 4b   α
                                    v1 = v2 = 4(N ′ W ′ + 2b
                                                           α) .                                 (3.1.56)

The solution for M is also easy to calculate by extremizing (3.1.11) and we get
                                                                   
                                      w/b
                                      b n
                                            N ′ /W ′               
                             M =  
                                                                    .
                                                                                               (3.1.57)
                                                      n
                                                      b /w
                                                         b
                                                              ′   ′
                                                            W /N

                                                     48
                                          b and R denote the radii of Sb1 and S 1 measured in the
Comparing with eq.(3.1.27) we see that if R
string metric after ZZN orbifolding then
                                          p                  p
                                     b=
                                     R        n
                                              b/w,
                                                b       R=       W ′ /N ′ .                    (3.1.58)

Finally (3.1.53) gives
                                                 p
                                      SBH = 2π       n b ′ W ′ + 4b
                                                     bw(N         α) .                         (3.1.59)

We shall see in §4 (see eq.(4.2.6) and the discussion below) that (3.1.59) is the exact answer for the
entropy in the nbwb >> N ′ W ′ limit. More generally one can show that (3.1.53) is exact in the limit
p
  Q2 P 2 − (Q · P )2 >> P 2 .
   Let us now turn to the question of validity of (3.1.49). The question is: how does the formula
get corrected by other four derivative terms? To this end we make the following observations:

   • A simple scaling argument shows that the contribution to the entropy from the four derivative
        terms must remain invariant when all charges are scaled by a common parameter. This is
        manifestly true for the contribution from the Gauss-Bonnet term. The contribution from the
        other four derivative terms must also satisfy this constraint.

   • Since the answer for the entropy after inclusion of Gauss-Bonnet term is duality invariant, the
     additional contribution due to the other four derivative terms must be duality invariant by
     itself.
          p
   • For Q2 P 2 − (Q · P )2 >> P 2 the additional contribution must vanish since we know that in
        this limit the correction to the entropy due to the Gauss-Bonnet term captures the complete
        answer.

This gives strong constraints on the contribution from the additional four derivative terms. Having
this contribution vanish is consistent with all these constraints. We would like to believe that these,
together with some other constraints, can be used to argue that the additional term actually vanishes,
but we do not have such a proof as of now. However we shall see in §5.6 that (3.1.49) agrees perfectly
with the first non-leading correction to the statistical entropy.

3.1.5     Non-supersymmetric extremal black holes

In the supergravity approximation non-supersymmetric black holes arise for P 2 Q2 < (Q · P )2, and
the entropy of the corresponding black hole has been given in (3.1.24). Let us consider a special class


                                                      49
of such black holes with charge vector given in (3.1.54), for the range

                                      N ′, W ′, n
                                                b > 0,   w
                                                         b < 0.                                (3.1.60)

                                     b → −b
This differs from (3.1.19) by a flip n     n. Extremization of E can be done simply by flipping, in
the solution corresponding to (3.1.54), (3.1.55), the sign of the electric field conjugate to n
                                                                                              b keeping
every other near horizon parameter unchanged. Thus the solution and the black hole entropy for
n                                             b replaced by −b
b > 0 are given by eqs.(3.1.56)-(3.1.59) with n              n. In particular the black hole entropy
is given by
                                    ns
                                              p
                                   SBH = 2π    |b
                                                nw|(N
                                                  b   ′ W ′ + 4b
                                                               α) .                            (3.1.61)

3.2     Black holes in N = 2 supersymmetric theories in D = 4
In this section we shall apply the entropy function formalism to calculate the entropy of extremal
black holes in a more general class of theories in four dimensions, namely N = 2 supergravity theories.
Our analysis will follow [73].

3.2.1   General considerations

The off-shell formulation of N = 2 supergravity action in four dimensions was developed in [74, 75,
76, 77, 78, 79, 80, 81, 82]. Here we shall review this formulation following the notation of [83]. The
basic bosonic fields in the theory are a set of (N + 1) complex scalar fields X I with 0 ≤ I ≤ N
(of which one can be gauged away using a scaling symmetry), (N + 1) gauge fields AIµ and the
metric gµν . Besides this the theory contains several non-dynamical fields. For the black hole solution
we shall study, many of these fields can be set to zero using certain symmetries of the action and
constraints. The relevant field which takes non-zero value near the horizon is a complex anti-self-
                                 −
dual antisymmetric tensor field Tµν . The lagrangian density L of the theory involving these fields is
determined completely in terms of a single holomorphic function F (X,~ A)
                                                                        b of the scalars X I and an
                   b satisfying
auxiliary variable A,
                                         ~ λ2 A)
                                     F (λX,   b = λ2 F (X,
                                                        ~ A)
                                                           b .                                  (3.2.1)

The expression for L in terms of this function F has been reviewed in [83]; for brevity we shall not
reproduce it here.
   In order to facilitate comparison with the results obtained by other approaches, e.g. in [83], we
shall use a different normalization convention for the charges than the one used so far. We introduce



                                                   50
charges qeI , peI related to the charges qI , pI of the earlier convention via the relations:

                                                                            pI
                                               qeI = −2 qI ,        peI =      .                                (3.2.2)
                                                                            4π
With this normalization convention a general extremal black hole in this theory has a near horizon
geometry of the form:

                                ds2 = v1 (−r 2 dt2 + dr 2/r 2 ) + v2 (dθ2 + sin2 θdφ2 )
                                FrtI = eI ,     I
                                               Fθφ = peI sin θ,      X I = xI ,     Trt− = v1 w .               (3.2.3)

Using the known Lagrangian density L, we can calculate the entropy function associated with this
black hole:                                                    Z              
                                                        1            p
                 E(v1 , v2 , w, ~x, ~e, ~qe, ~pe) = 2π − qeI e − dθdφ − det g L .
                                                              I
                                                                                         (3.2.4)
                                                        2
The result is [73]:

                           E = −πe  qI eI − π g(v1, v2 , w, ~x, ~e, ~pe)
                                     
                          ~
   g(v1 , v2 , w, ~x, ~e, pe) = v1 v2 i(v1−1 − v2−1 )(xI F̄I − x̄I FI )
                                 ni                               1                          1                o
                                − v1−2 FIJ (eI − iv1 v2−1 peI − x̄I v1 w)(eJ − iv1 v2−1 peJ − x̄J v1 w) + h.c.
                                   4                              2                          2
                                 ni                                1              o
                                − v1−1 w F̄I (eI − iv1 v2−1 peI − x̄I v1 w) + h.c.
                                   4                               2
                                 ni               o                             1               
                                + w̄ 2F + h.c. + 8 i w̄w − v1−1 − v2−1 + w̄w FAb − F̄Ab
                                   8                                             8
                                                                
                                +64 i (v1−1 − v2−1 )2 FAb − F̄Ab           ,
                                                                       b
                                                                       A=−4w 2

                                                                                                                (3.2.5)

where
                       ∂F               ∂F                ∂2F                      ∂2F                 ∂2F
                FI =       ,    FAb =      ,    FIJ =            ,     FAI
                                                                        b =              ,   FAbAb =        ,   (3.2.6)
                       ∂xI               b
                                        ∂A               ∂xI ∂xJ   b
                                                             ∂xI ∂ A                                   ∂Ab2
and bar denotes complex conjugation. This entropy function has a scale invariance

                xI → λxI ,       vi → λ−1 λ̄−1 vi ,    eI → eI . w → λw,            qeI → qeI ,   peI → peI .   (3.2.7)

This descends from the invariance of the lagrangian density of N = 2 supergravity theories under
local scale transformation, and is usually eliminated by using some gauge fixing condition. We


                                                               51
shall however find it convenient to work with the gauge invariant equations of motion obtained by
extremizing (3.2.5) with respect to v1 , v2 , w, ~x and ~e.
   It can be easily seen that the entropy function is extremized if we set
                                                          16
                                            v1 = v2 =        ,                                     (3.2.8)
                                                         w̄w
                                                      1
                                   eI − iv1 v2−1 peI − x̄I v1 w = 0                                (3.2.9)
                                                      2
                                                               i
                                   (w̄ −1F̄I − w −1 FI ) = − qeI .                               (3.2.10)
                                                               4
Taking the real and imaginary parts of eq.(2.2.20) gives

                                       eI = 4(w̄ −1 x̄I + w −1 xI ) ,                            (3.2.11)

and
                                                          1
                                 (w̄ −1x̄I − w −1xI ) = − i peI .                         (3.2.12)
                                                          4
The black hole entropy computed by evaluating the entropy function in this background is given by
                                                                    
                                        1~              −2        −2
                          SBH = 2π − qe · ~e − 16 i (w F − w̄ F̄ ) .                      (3.2.13)
                                        2

                                                        b
If we choose w=constant gauge (which corresponds to A=−4w      2
                                                                 =constant), then eqs.(3.2.8)-(3.2.12)
describe the usual supersymmetric attractor equations for the near horizon geometry of extremal
black holes, and (3.2.13) gives the expression for the entropy of these black holes as written down
in [84, 85, 86, 72, 87, 83, 88, 89, 2]. For example (3.2.13) shows that in the gauge w =real constant, the
Legendre transform of the black hole entropy with respect to the electric charges qeI is proportional to
the imaginary part of the prepotential F . Furthermore eqs.(3.2.8), (3.2.9) shows that the argument
xI of the prepotential is proportional to eI + ie
                                                pI , ı.e. its real part is the variable conjugate to the
electric charge qeI and its imaginary part is the magnetic charge peI . These observations were originally
made in [2].
    The attractor equations (3.2.8)-(3.2.12) provide sufficient but not necessary conditions for ex-
tremizing the entropy function. We can have other near horizon configurations which extremize
the entropy function but do not satisfy eqs.(3.2.8)-(3.2.12). These will typically describe non-
supersymmetric extremal black holes.




                                                    52
3.2.2    S-T-U model

A special N = 2 supergravity theory which will be of interest to us is a model with four complex
scalars X 0 , . . . X 3 , described by the prepotential
                                                             1 2 3
                                                                    b b X1
                                                       b = −X X X − α
                             F (X 0 , X 1 , X 2 , X 3, A)             A    ,                    (3.2.14)
                                                              X0    64 X 0
where α
      b is a constant. The scalar fields take value in the range
                                       a
                                       X
                                 Im          > 0 for a = 1, 2, 3 .                              (3.2.15)
                                       X0

    b = 0 this theory describes a subsector of the N = 4 supergravity theory with two derivative
For α
terms as described in eqs.(3.1.26)-(3.1.29). In this case the dilaton-axion pair (S, a) appearing in
(3.1.3) correspond respectively to the imaginary and real parts of X 1 /X 0 :

                                                 X1
                                                    = a + iS .                                  (3.2.16)
                                                 X0
Various components of the 4 × 4 matrix valued field M can be identified with various combinations
of the four real fields associated with X 2 /X 0 and X 3 /X 0 . In particular in terms of the components
bmn and B
G         bmn (4 ≤ m, n ≤ 5) appearing in (3.1.27) we have

                         X2          p                    X3                  p
                            = b45 + i det G,
                              B           b                  = (Gb45 + iG
                                                                        b44 )/ det G
                                                                                   b.           (3.2.17)
                         X0                               X0
These relations take simple form if the fields X 2 /X 0 and X 3 /X 0 are purely imaginary. In this case
the corresponding matrix M is diagonal. If we parametrize X 2 /X 0 and X 3 /X 0 as

                                          X2                   X3     b
                                                                      R
                                                 b
                                             = iRR,               = i                           (3.2.18)
                                          X0                   X0     R
then                                                                  
                                           b−2
                                           R           0       0    0
                                          0          R−2      0    0 
                                      M =
                                          0
                                                                       .                       (3.2.19)
                                                       0       b2
                                                               R    0 
                                            0          0       0    R2
                                                        b and R have the interpretation of the radii of
As can be seen from (3.2.17) and (3.2.18), in this case R
                                                                                                 (i)
Sb1 and S 1 / ZZN measured in the string metric. Finally the four sets of gauge field strengths Fµν are
                                                   I
related to the four sets of gauge field strengths Fµν of the N = 2 supergravity theory under study
via a complicated set of duality transformations. The relations between the gauge fields are best

                                                          53
summarized by relating the electric and magnetic charges qeI , peI of the N = 2 supergravity theory
with the charges Qi and Pi appearing in §3.1:12

                                   Q4 = qe2 ,           p1 ,
                                                  Q3 = −e             Q2 = qe3 ,      Q1 = qe0 ,
                                   P4 = pe3 ,     P3 = pe0 ,        P2 = pe2 ,     P1 = qe1 .                 (3.2.20)

After eliminating the electric field variables eI from (3.2.5) using the ∂E/∂eI = 0 equations and fixing
an appropriate ‘gauge’ for the symmetry (3.2.7), the entropy function (3.2.5) of the S-T-U model
reduces to the one given in (3.1.11).
   We have seen in §3.1 that the T-duality invariant combination of the charges are

 Q2 = 2(Q4 Q2 + Q3 Q1 ),        P 2 = 2(P4 P2 + P3 P1 ),            Q · P = (Q4 P2 + Q3 P1 + Q2 P4 + Q1 P3 ) . (3.2.21)

One can explicitly verify that for

                           P 2 Q2 > (Q · P )2 ,     P2 , P4 > 0,         Q1 , Q3 < 0,       P3 = 0            (3.2.22)

the supersymmetric attractor equations (3.2.8)-(3.2.12) can be solved by setting [85, 73]13
                               1        Q3 P 2
                        x0 = − p
                               8 P 2Q2 − (P · Q)2
                                           p
                        x1      P ·Q           P 2 Q2 − (P · Q)2
                           =  −       +  i
                        x0       P2                   P2                     p
                        x2        1                                       P2 P 2 Q2 − (P · Q)2
                           =−          (Q3 P1 + Q4 P2 − P4 Q2 ) − i
                        x0      2Q3 P4                                    Q3       P2
                                                                             p
                        x3        1                                       P4 P 2 Q2 − (P · Q)2
                           =  −        (Q  3 P 1 −  Q4 P 2 + P 4 Q2 ) − i
                        x0      2Q3 P2                                    Q3       P2
                        v1 = v2 = 16,        eI = 8 Re(xI ) for 0 ≤ I ≤ 3,           w = 1,                   (3.2.23)

Evaluating the entropy function at the solution and rewriting the result in terms of the duality
invariant combinations P 2 , Q2 and Q · P , we get back the result
                                            p
                                     E = π Q2 P 2 − (Q · P )2 ,                         (3.2.24)

in agreement with (3.1.23). The parameters v1 , v2 given in (3.2.23) do not agree with the ones given
in (3.1.20) even though the two theories are supposed to be equivalent. This can be traced to the
  12
     This differs from the identification made in [73] by a transformation (Q1 , Q2 , Q3 , Q4 ) → (Q4 , Q3 , Q2 , Q1 ),
(P1 , P2 , P3 , P4 ) → (P4 , P3 , P2 , P1 ).
  13
     Here w = 1 is gauge condition.

                                                               54
fact that in the w = 1 gauge being used here, the metric in the two descriptions are related by a field
dependent scale transformation.
    Finally note that although the expression (3.2.24) for the entropy was derived for a special choice
of the charges (P3 = 0), T-duality invariance guarantees that (3.2.24) continues to hold even when
we deform P3 away from 0.
   We shall now consider the effect of switching on the constant α      b. In the N = 2 supergravity
theory this gives rise to various higher derivative terms in the action. Of them is a term proportional
to S times the square of the Riemann tensor, and the coefficient is identical to the one appearing in
(3.1.38) for φ(a, S) given in (3.1.50). However the two actions are not physically equivalent ı.e. they
cannot be related by a field redefinition even at the level of four derivative terms. If we solve the
attractor equations (3.2.8)-(3.2.12) and calculate the entropy by evaluating the entropy function at
the solution, we get
                                   s
                             1       P 2 (P 2 + 8b α)
                       x0 = − Q3
                             8     P Q − (P · Q)2
                                     2   2
                                       s
                       x1     P ·Q         P 2 Q2 − (P · Q)2
                          = −      + i
                       x0      P2            P 2 (P 2 + 8b
                                                         α)
                                                                           s
                       x2       1                                    P2        P 2 Q2 − (P · Q)2
                          = −        (Q3 P 1 + Q4 P 2 − P 4 Q2 ) − i
                       x0     2Q3 P4                                 Q3          P 2 (P 2 + 8b
                                                                                             α)
                                                                           s
                        3
                       x       1                                 P4            P 2 Q2 − (P · Q)2
                        0
                          =−        (Q3 P1 − Q4 P2 + P4 Q2 ) − i
                       x     2Q3 P2                              Q3              P 2 (P 2 + 8b
                                                                                             α)
                       v1 = v2 = 16,    eI = 8 Re(xI ) for 0 ≤ I ≤ 3,        w = 1,                         (3.2.25)
                                                            r
                                         p                        8bα
                                 SBH = π P 2 Q2 − (P · Q)2 1 + 2 .                                          (3.2.26)
                                                                  P
Surprisingly, the result for the entropy agrees with the one given in (3.1.53).
   For a special class of black holes for which
                                                                   
                                           n
                                           b                       0
                                        0                      W′ 
                                   Q=  w
                                             ,               P =    
                                                                  0 ,                                     (3.2.27)
                                           b
                                           0                       N′
                                        N ′ , W ′ > 0,         n
                                                               b, w
                                                                  b < 0,                                    (3.2.28)
the solution (3.2.25) gives
           r                                   r                                     r
     x1           n
                  bw b            x2      W′          n
                                                      bw b             x3      N′            n
                                                                                             bwb
      0
        =i      ′  ′
                          ,          = −i                    ,            = −i                          .   (3.2.29)
     x        N W + 4b  α         x0      w
                                          b         ′  ′
                                                   N W + 4bα           x0      w
                                                                               b         N ′ W ′ + 4b
                                                                                                    α

                                                         55
Using (3.2.16) and (3.2.18) we get
                      r r                              r                     r
                 b= n    b     N ′W ′                       W′                       n
                                                                                     bwb
                 R                      ,        R=            ,      uS =                      .   (3.2.30)
                         b N ′ W ′ + 4b
                         w            α                     N′                   N ′ W ′ + 4b
                                                                                            α
Finally (3.2.26) gives
                                                p
                                     SBH = 2π       n b ′ W ′ + 4b
                                                    bw(N         α) .                               (3.2.31)

                 b the solution (3.2.30) differs from the solution given in (3.1.56), (3.1.58) for N = 4
For nonvanishing α
supergravity theory with Gauss-Bonnet term, but the formulæ (3.1.59) and (3.2.31) for the entropy
continue to agree [90, 4].
   We would like to note that neither the Gauss-Bonnet correction given in (3.1.38), nor the cor-
rection to the prepotential proportional to α  b given in (3.2.14), describes the complete set of four
derivative corrections in tree level string theory. Nevertheless we shall argue in §4 that the result
(3.1.59) or (3.2.31) does not change after inclusion of additional terms in the effective action at string
tree level, ı.e. for large S. Translated to a condition on the charges, this means that the result (3.1.59)
or (3.2.31) become a good approximation in the limit when the electric charges are much larger than
the magnetic charges.
   Given this surprising agreement between the N = 4 and N = 2 results one might ask whether it
is possible to also reproduce the more general results (3.1.47), (3.1.48) from the N = 2 viewpoint.
This cannot be done completely rigorously since due to the presence of holomorphic anomaly term
proportional to ln S in the coefficient (3.1.40) of the curvature squared term there is no known
generalization of this term into an N = 2 supersymmentric lagrangian. Nevertheless the form of
these corrections were guessed in [72] by first examining the contribution from the rest of the terms
in φ(a, S) and then requiring the result to be duality invariant.

3.2.3   Non-supersymmetric extremal black holes

We can also construct non-supersymmetric extremal black holes in this theory by directly solving the
equations corresponding to extremization of E rather than solving the attractor equations (3.2.8)-
                    b = 0 the theory is equivalent to the N = 4 supergravity theory described in
(3.2.12). Since for α
§3.1.1, a convenient starting point for constructing non-supersymmetric solution is to start with the
non-supersymmetric solution described in §3.1.5 for α b = 0. Thus we consider the charge vectors of
the form given in (3.2.27) with n  b N ′ , W ′ in the range
                                b, w,

                                        N ′ , W ′, n
                                                   b > 0,    w
                                                             b < 0.                                 (3.2.32)


                                                     56
The solution and the entropy for αb = 0 are obtained simply by replacing n  b → −bn and setting α
                                                                                                b=0
in eqs.(3.1.56)-(3.1.59). Using the relations (3.2.16), (3.2.18) and (3.2.19) between the scalar fields
in the N = 4 description and the N = 2 description, we get
                          r                      s                              s
       x1
                            |b
                             nw|
                               b     x2
                                                    bW ′             3     b      bN ′
          = u a + iu S = i         ,    = iR b=i n
                                             R           ,
                                                                    x
                                                                       = i
                                                                           R
                                                                             = i
                                                                                  n
                                                                                       ,       (3.2.33)
       x0                   N ′W ′   x0             b ′
                                                    wN              x0     R      b ′
                                                                                  wW

and
                                                  p
                                       SBH = 2π       |b b ′W ′ .
                                                       nw|N                                    (3.2.34)

Note that we cannot use (3.1.56) to determine the values of v1 and v2 in the N = 2 description since
they are gauge dependent in this description. Instead v1 , v2 and w are found by directly solving the
extremization equations of the N = 2 theory after fixing an appropriate gauge. Beginning with this
leading order solution, we can solve the extremization equations for E given in (3.2.5) in a power
series expansion in α
                    b. We shall not describe the details of the calculation but only give the final
result for the entropy calculated by this method [73]:

  ns
            p
 SBH = 2π    |b b ′ W ′ (1+80u−3712u2 −243712u3 −18325504u4 −9538502656u5 +O(u6 )) , (3.2.35)
              nw|N

where
                                                   α
                                                   b
                                           u=              .                                   (3.2.36)
                                                128N ′ W ′

3.3     Small black holes
In this section we shall focus on a special subset of the black holes described in §3.1 and §3.2.2,
– those with vanishing magnetic charge P~ . These black holes, being purely electrically charged,
have the same quantum numbers as the elementary string excitations in the second description of
these theories. In particular the extremal supersymmetric black holes should correspond to BPS
states [91, 92] in the spectrum of elementary string. A simple class of such states, corresponding
to P~ = 0 and Q   ~ of the form given in (3.2.27) with n
                                                       b, w
                                                          b < 0, represent BPS elementary string
                b units of momentum and −w
states carrying n                         b units of winding along Sb1 . In the light-cone gauge
Green-Schwarz formulation of the fundamental string world-sheet theory, we denote by L′0 and L̄′0
the vacuum and oscillator contribution to the zero modes L0 and L̄0 of the left- and the right-
handed Virasoro generators. On the other hand the contributions to L0 and L̄0 from the momentum
                                         √             √
and winding along Sb1 are given by 1/4(b      b∓w
                                       n α ′ /R     b α′ )2 , where R
                                                   bR/                b is the radius of Sb1 . Thus
the contribution to L0 − L̄0 from these charges is given by −b
                                                             nw,
                                                               b and the left-right level matching


                                                  57
condition tells us that these states must have L′0 − L̄′0 = n
                                                            bw.
                                                              b On the other hand since space-time
supersymmetry originates in the right-moving sector of the world-sheet theory, the BPS condition
tells us that L̄′ must vanish. Thus we have L′ = n
                                                 bw.                                           ~ by
                                                   b For a more general electric charge vector Q,
                 0                             0
matching the quantum numbers of the black hole with that of the elementary string and imposing
the left-right level matching condition one can easily verify that a supersymmetric black hole with
charge Q~ would correspond to elementary string excitations where the right-moving oscillators are
in the L̄′0 = 0 state and the left-moving oscillators are excited to a level L′0 = Q2 /2 [93, 94, 95]. The
degeneracy d(Q) of these states for large Q2 can be computed using the Cardy formula (1.4). Since
for the heterotic string theory cL = 24 and for the type II string theory cL = 12, we have
                                                               p
                                    Sstat (Q) ≡ ln d(Q) ≃ 4π    Q2 /2                              (3.3.1)

for heterotic string theory, and
                                                          √ p
                                   Sstat (Q) ≡ ln d(Q) ≃ 2 2 π Q2 /2                               (3.3.2)

for type II string theory. We would like to test if the entropy of the corresponding black hole solution,
computed by extremizing the entropy funcion, agrees with this statistical entropy. This is the problem
we shall now address. The analysis will have two parts. First we shall use symmetry principles to
argue that the black hole entropy, if non-zero, will have the same dependence on the charges as in
(3.3.1), (3.3.2) [93, 94]. Then we shall describe computation of the overall coefficient [96].
    Since the black hole carries zero magnetic charges, the near horizon background of the black hole
is of the form
                                              
                                          dr 2
                         ds = v1 −r dt + 2 + v2 (dθ2 + sin2 θ dφ2 ) ,
                           2       2 2
                                           r
                                  S = uS ,      a = ua , Mij = uM ij
                                                         (i)          (i)
                                                        Frt = ei ,   Fθφ = 0 ,                     (3.3.3)

and in the leading supergravity approximation the function f given in (3.1.7) becomes:
                                                            Z
                                                                  √
                                f (uS , ua , uM , ~v, ~e) ≡ dθdφ − det G L
                                                                            
                                1                  2      2   2
                            =      v1 v2 uS − +             + ei (LuM L)ij ej .                    (3.3.4)
                                8                v1 v2 v12
It is easy to see that the entropy function computed from this function f has no non-trivial extremum.
Indeed, if we set P~ = 0 in (3.1.22) we get singular solution, and the entropy given in (3.1.23) vanishes.

                                                   58
   It is in principle possible that once higher derivative and/or string loop corrections to the super-
gravity action are included, we might get a non-singular solution. However since the leading solution
is singular, these corrections are no longer small, and we may have to include all possible corrections
to the effective action. The goal of this section will be to analyze the effect of these corrections in
detail and see if we can extract some useful information about the entropy of such black holes.
    In order to get some insight into the problem we note from (3.1.22) that if we naively take P~ → 0
in these equations then uS → ∞ whereas vi → 0. Since uS denotes the inverse string coupling
square this implies that the string coupling constant becomes small at the horizon. Thus we could
expect that the string loop corrections are not important. On the other hand since the curvatures
of AdS2 and S 2 measured in the string metric are inversely proportional to v1 and v2 respectively,
they become large in this limit and we expect that higher derivative corrections to the action become
important near the horizon of the small black hole. Thus we should in principle include all tree level
higher derivative corrections. For the time being we shall proceed with this ansatz and study the
effect of tree level higher derivative corrections to the black hole solution. Later we shall verify that
the solution obtained with this assumption is self-consistent, namely that the effect of string loop
corrections on these solutions are indeed small.
    The effective action of the tree level string theory, with all the Ramond-Ramond (RR) fields set
to zero, has two important properties which will be important for our analysis:

  1. The full tree level effective action of string theory is invariant under a continuous SO(6, r − 6)
     T-duality symmetry. As a result the complete entropy function
                                                                            
                                              1
                                    E = 2π ei Qi − f (uS , ua , uM , ~v, ~e)                    (3.3.5)
                                              2

      computed with the tree level effective action of string theory will be invariant under the trans-
      formation
                         ei → Ωij ej ,     uM → ΩuM ΩT ,         Qi → (ΩT )−1
                                                                            ij Qj .             (3.3.6)

  2. The tree level effective action picks up a constant multiplicative factor λ under S → λS,
      a → λa. As a result
                                f (λuS , λua , uM , ~v, ~e) = λ f (uS , ua , uM , ~v, ~e) ,       (3.3.7)

      and
                          E → λE     under Qi → λQi ,             uS → λuS ,        ua → λua .    (3.3.8)



                                                        59
These two properties imply that the black hole entropy SBH (Q), obtained by extremizing the entropy
function with respect to the variables ei , v1 , v2 , uM ij , uS and ua , has the following two properties:
                    ~ only through the duality invariant combination Q2 ≡ Qi Lij Qj .
  1. SBH depends on Q

  2. SBH has the scaling property

                                     SBH → λ SBH         under Qi → λQi .                           (3.3.9)

This gives
                                                         p
                                            SBH = C       Q2 ,                                    (3.3.10)
for some constant C. This agrees with the expression for the statistical entropy given in (3.3.1),
(3.3.2) up to an overall normalization constant C which cannot be determined from this simple
scaling argument.
    Eq.(3.3.10) can in fact be derived even without assuming an AdS2 × S D−2 near horizon geometry
[93, 94]. The main additional complication in this analysis is that in absence of a near horizon
AdS2 geometry and the associated attractor mechanism we can no longer assume that the entropy is
independent of the asymptotic moduli; we have to prove this by explicitly examining the supergravity
solution describing the near horizon geometry of small black holes. This was carried out in [93,94,97].
    The same scaling argument also tells us that at the extremum
                                                          p              p
                      v1 = c1 , v2 = c2 , ei = c3 Lij Qj / Q2 , uS = c4 Q2 ,                   (3.3.11)

                                                    ~ This shows that uS is large for large Q2 and
where ci ’s are numerical constants independent of Q.
hence string loop corrections are indeed small near the horizon. On the other hand since v1 , v2 and
ei are of order unity, higher derivative corrections are important, and we must include all tree level
higher derivative corrections to the action to get a reliable estimate of the constant C appearing in
(3.3.10). Nevertheless it is instructive to see what value of C we get just by including the Gauss-
Bonnet term in the action. For this we set Q · P = 0 and then take the P 2 → 0 limit of (3.1.53)
(or equivalently (3.2.26) if we want to do this computation in N = 2 supersymmetric S-T-U model
with the prepotential given in (3.2.14)) which was derived for the case when electric charges are large
compared to magnetic charges. This gives [96, 98, 99, 100, 101]
                                                   p
                                         SBH = 4π α  b Q2 /2 .                                 (3.3.12)

   Using (3.1.43) we see that for heterotic string compactification, the constant α
                                                                                  b = 1. Thus the
result for the entropy calculated with the Gauss-Bonnet term agrees exactly with the statistical

                                                    60
entropy given in (3.3.1). On the other hand for type II string theories the constant α    b vanishes,
showing that the entropy vanishes to this order. This is in disagreement with the statistical entropy
(3.3.2). We should keep in mind however that at this point there is no reason to expect that including
just the Gauss-Bonnet correction will give the correct value of the constant C. Hence at this stage
neither the agreement for the heterotic string theory, nor the disagreement for the type II string
theory should be taken seriously. We shall return to a more detailed discussion on this point in §4.4.
   The scaling analysis carried out here can be easily generalized to higher dimensional small black
holes [94,97]. It can also be generalized to include elementary string states carrying angular momen-
tum [102] assuming that the near horizon geometry of such an object has the structure of a black
ring with AdS2 × S 1 × S d−3 near horizon geometry [103, 104].
    There is one subtle point about the small black hole that requires special mention. According
to the analysis described in this section, the near horizon geometry of a small black hole is given
by AdS2 × S 2 . As seen from (3.3.3), there is an electric flux through AdS2 , but there is no flux
through S 2 . This creates a puzzle. If the background given in (3.3.3) is what couples to the sigma
model describing string propagation in this background, then the sigma model will be a direct sum
of two conformal field theories, – one associated with AdS2 together with the electric flux through it,
and the other associated with S 2 without any flux. However it is well known that the sigma model
associated with S 2 does not give rise to a conformal field theory; instead under the renormalization
group flow the radius of S 2 goes to zero in the infrared. This would seem to contradict the result
that the near horizon geometry of the black hole is given by (3.3.3). The only consistent resolution to
this puzzle seems to be that the metric and other field variables in terms of which the solution takes
the form (3.3.3) are not the ones which couple directly to the world-sheet sigma model.14 Instead
the fields which couple to the sigma model must be related to the ones appearing in (3.3.3) by an
appropriate field redefinition which becomes singular when evaluated on the solution of the entropy
function extremization equations. For example the sigma model metric could be related to the one
in (3.3.3) by multiplication by a T-duality invariant function of the gauge field strengths and the
matrix M, such that this factor vanishes at the solution. In that case although the metric appearing
in (3.3.3) is finite at the solution, the metric that couples to the sigma model would correspond to a
sphere of zero radius in accordance with known results.
    An interesting problem is to construct the conformal field theory describing the near horizon
geometry of a small black hole. As should be clear from the above discussion, we do not expect
this to be a sum of two decoupled conformal field theories; instead it must be described as a single
 14
      See refs. [105, 106, 107, 108] for further insight into this issue.


                                                                61
conformal field theory involving the four non-compact space time coordinates as well as the internal
coordinates responsible for the electric charge of the black hole. Indeed, in order to argue that the
entropy of the black hole has the form given in (3.3.10), it is not necessary to assume a near horizon
geometry of the form (3.3.3); it is enough to assume the existence of a non-singular conformal field
theory associated with the near horizon geometry of the black hole [93, 94, 95]. Furthermore this
argument can be generalized to small black holes in higher dimensions as well. Various proposals for
this conformal field theory have recently been made in [105, 106, 107, 108].
   Finally, note that the above analysis holds only for the Neveu-Schwarz formulation of the con-
formal field theory. If instead we use the light-cone gauge Green-Schwarz formulation of the theory
then the world-sheet fermions transform in a spinor representation of the tangent space group of
the target manifold, and as a result the conformal field theories associated with the S 2 part does
not decouple from the rest of the conformal field theory. Thus in this case there is no argument
showing that the σ-model target space manifold cannot be AdS2 × S 2 (or, as we shall discuss in §4.4,
AdS3 × S 2 ).

3.4    Extremal BTZ black holes with gauge and gravitational Chern-
       Simons terms
BTZ solution describes a rotating black hole in three dimensional theory of gravity with negative
cosmological constant [109] and often appears as a factor in the near horizon geometry of higher
dimensional black holes in string theory [110, 111, 112]. For this reason it has provided us with a
useful tool for relating black hole entropy to the degeneracy of microstates of the black hole, both
in three dimensional theories of gravity and also in string theory [111, 113]. In this section we shall
apply the entropy function method to compute the entropy of a BTZ black hole in a theory of three
dimensional gravity coupled to a set of abelian gauge fields and neutral scalar fields, with an arbitrary
general coordinate invariant and gauge invariant action. In particular we shall include Lorentz Chern-
Simons terms of the form described in (2.6.26) and gauge Chern-Simons terms. In the spirit of the
discussion in §2.5 this will be done by treating the angular coordinate along which the brane rotates
as a compact direction. The analysis presented here will be a generalization of the one given in [45]
where we considered the case of a purely gravitational theory, and will borrow insights from the
analysis of [114, 115]. Computation of the entropy of BTZ black holes in a general higher derivative
theory of gravity without Chern-Simons terms has been carried out previously in [116]. Entropy of
BTZ black holes has also been analyzed using the Euclidean action formalism in [117, 19, 20, 118].
  Let us consider a three dimensional theory of gravity with metric GM N (0 ≤ M, N ≤ 2), U(1)

                                                   62
                (i)
gauge fields AM (1 ≤ i ≤ n1 ) and neutral scalar fields {φs } (1 ≤ s ≤ n2 ) and a general action of the
form:15                           Z                h                    i
                                       √              (3)    (3)    (3)
                             S = d3 x − det G L0 + L1 + L2 .                                    (3.4.1)
        (3)                                                                                                   (i)
Here L0 denotes an arbitrary scalar function of the metric, scalar fields, gauge field strengths FM N =
    (i)       (i)                                                                          √          (3)
∂M AN − ∂N AM , the Riemann tensor and covariant derivatives of these quantities.            − det G L1
denotes the gravitational Chern-Simons term:
                                          √            (3)       b ,
                                              − det G L1 = K Ω3 (Γ)                                          (3.4.2)

                       b is the Christoffel connection constructed out of the metric GM N and
where K is a constant, Γ
                                                                       
                             b =ǫ M  N P   1 b ∂N Γ
                                               R   b + Γ
                                                    S     1 b Γ
                                                             R b Γ
                                                                 S  b T
                         Ω3 (Γ)              Γ                            .                 (3.4.3)
                                           2 MS     PR
                                                          3 MS NT P R
                                                               √          (3)
ǫ is the totally anti-symmetric symbol with ǫ012 = 1. Finally − det G L2 denotes a gauge Chern-
Simons term of the form:
                                √           (3)  1            (i) (j)
                                  − det G L2 = Cij ǫM N P AM FN P ,                            (3.4.4)
                                                 2
for some constants Cij = Cji.
    We shall consider field configurations where one of the coordinates (say y ≡ x2 ) is compact with
period 2π and the metric is independent of this compact direction. In this case we can define two
dimensional fields through the relation:16
                                                               
                  GM N dxM dxN = φ gµν dxµ dxν + (dy + aµ dxµ )2 ,                  0 ≤ µ, ν ≤ 1
                         (i)
                        AM dxM      = χ(i) (dy + aµ dxµ ) + a(i) µ
                                                             µ dx .                                          (3.4.5)
                                                               (i)
Here gµν denotes a two dimensional metric, aµ and aµ denote two dimensional gauge fields and φ
and χ(i) denote two dimensional scalar fields. In terms of these two dimensional fields
                1 (i)                                       1 (i)           µ
                  FM N dxM ∧ dxN = dχ(i) ∧ (dy + aµ dxµ ) +            (i)
                                                              χ fµν + fµν   dx ∧ dxν ,                       (3.4.6)
                2                                           2
where
                                               (i)
                                              fµν  = ∂µ a(i)     (i)
                                                         ν − ∂ν aµ ,                                         (3.4.7)
  15
     We could add any number of scalar fields without changing the final result since they must be frozen to constant
values in order to comply with the homogeneity of the BTZ configuration.
  16
     The two dimensional view of the three dimensional black holes was first discussed in [119].



                                                         63
and
                                               fµν = ∂µ aν − ∂ν aµ .                                   (3.4.8)
The action takes the form:
                                    Z      p       h               i
                                           2         (2)  (2)  (2)
                               S=       d x − det g L0 + L1 + L2                                       (3.4.9)

where                                      Z
                      p            (2)
                                        √          (3)
                                                          √        (3)
                          − det g L0 =dy − det G L0 = 2π − det G L0 ,                                 (3.4.10)
                                                                 
                        p         (2)       1 µν       1 µν   τσ
                         − det g L1 = K π     Rε fµν + ε fµτ f fσν .                                  (3.4.11)
                                            2          2
and                                                                                   
                          p         (2)                               1
                           − det g L2 = Cij εµν            χ(i) fµν
                                                                 (j)
                                                                     + χ(i) χ(j) fµν       .          (3.4.12)
                                                                       2
Here R is the scalar curvature of the two dimensional metric gµν and εµν is the totally antisymmetric
                                                                                                (3)
symbol with ε01 = 1. (3.4.10) is a straightforward dimensional reduction of the L0 term. (3.4.11)
comes from dimensional reduction of the gravitational Chern-Simons term after throwing away total
derivative terms and was worked out in [48]. (3.4.12) comes from dimensional reduction of (3.4.4)
after throwing away total derivative terms. (3.4.11), (3.4.12) show that although the Chern-Simons
terms cannot be expressed in a manifestly covariant form in three dimensions, they do reduce to
manifestly covariant expressions in two dimensions.
    We shall define a general extremal black hole in the two dimensional theory to be the one whose
near horizon geometry is AdS2 and for which the scalar fields φ, {φs } and {χ(i) } and the gauge field
                    (i)
strengths fµν and fµν are invariant under the SO(2, 1) isometry of the AdS2 background. The most
general near horizon background consistent with this requirement is
                                                    
                             µ  ν        2 2    dr 2
                       gµν dx dx = v −r dt + 2 ,            frt = e,                   φ = u,
                                                 r
                                     (i)
                       φs = u s ,   frt = ei ,      χ(i) = wi ,                                       (3.4.13)

where v, e, u, {us }, {ei } and {wi } are constants. This corresponds to a three dimensional configu-
ration of the form
                                                          dr 2
                           GM N dxM dxN = v u (−r 2 dt2 +    2
                                                               ) + u (dy + erdt)2
                                                           r
                             (i) M
                           AM dx = wi (dy + erdt) + ei rdt,        φs = u s
                           1 (i)
                             FM N dxM ∧ dxN = (ei + wi e) dr ∧ dt .                                   (3.4.14)
                           2
                                                        64
Following the procedure described in §2 we define
                                               p          (2)  (2)  (2)
                                            ~ = − det g (L0 + L1 + L2 ) ,
                        f (u, v, e, ~u, ~e, w)                                                                       (3.4.15)

evaluated in the background (3.4.13), and

                          E(u, v, e, ~u, ~e, w,
                                             ~ q, ~q) = 2π(eq + ei qi − f (u, v, e, ~u, ~e, w))
                                                                                            ~ .                      (3.4.16)

The near horizon values of u, v and e, {us }, {ei } and {wi } for an extremal black hole with electric
charges q, {qi } are obtained by extremizing the entropy function E with respect to these variables.
Furthermore, Wald’s entropy for this black hole is given by the value of the function E at this
extremum.
   Using eqs.(3.4.10), (3.4.11), (3.4.12) and (3.4.13), (3.4.15) we see that for the theory considered
here,
                                                                                                              
                                                                 −1        3   −2                    1
 f (u, v, e, ~u, ~e, w)
                     ~ = f0 (u, v, e, ~u, ~e + ew)
                                                ~ + π K (2 e v        − e v ) − 2 Cij         wi ej + ewi wj       , (3.4.17)
                                                                                                     2
where
                                                                       √            (3)
                                    f0 (u, v, e, ~u, ~e + ew)
                                                           ~ = 2π          − det G L0                                (3.4.18)
 evaluated in the background (3.4.14). Note that f0 depends on ~e and w   ~ only through the combination
                                                                      (i)
~e +ew~ since this is the combination that enters the expression for FM N given in (3.4.14). Substituting
(3.4.17) into (3.4.16) we get
                            
                                                             ~ − π K (2 e v −1 − e3 v −2 )
                  E = 2π eq + ei qi − f0 (u, v, e, ~u, ~e + ew)
                                                            
                                                     1
                              +2 Cij wi ej + ewi wj             .                                                    (3.4.19)
                                                     2
   We shall carry out the extremizaton of E in stages. First we shall eliminate wi and ei using their
equations of motion. Extremization of E with respect to wi gives
                                               ∂f0
                                          −e       + 2 Cij (ej + ewj ) = 0 .                                         (3.4.20)
                                               ∂ei
Now the terms in f0 involving ~e + e w
                                     ~ must involve quadratic and higher powers of ei + ewi since
                          (3)                           (i)
these come from terms in L0 involving the gauge fields FM N . Thus ∂f0 /∂ei vanishes for ~e + e w
                                                                                                ~ = 0,
This shows that (3.4.20) can be solved by choosing

                                                    ei + e wi = 0 .                                                  (3.4.21)

                                                           65
Extremization of E with respect to ei now gives
                                                 1
                                           wi = − Cij−1 qj ,                                  (3.4.22)
                                                 2
assuming that C is invertible as a matrix. Substituting (3.4.21) and (3.4.22) into the expression
(3.4.19) for E we now get
                                                                          
                          1 −1                       ~              −1  3 −2
           E = 2π e q − Cij qi qj − f0 (u, v, e, ~u, 0) − π K (2 e v − e v ) .                (3.4.23)
                          4
                                                                                                  (i)
Eq.(3.4.21) together with (3.4.14) tells us that the three dimensional gauge field strengths FM N
                                               (i)
vanish, although the gauge field components Ay have non-zero constant values proportional to wi .
    We now turn to the extremization of E with respect to u, v, e and ~u. It turns out that if v and e
satisfy the relation
                                                  v = e2                                      (3.4.24)
then the background (3.4.14) actually describes a locally AdS3 space-time. Since a local AdS3 space
has a higher degree of isometry than a local AdS2 space, setting v = e2 is a consistent truncation of
the theory and hence we can extremize the entropy function within this class of configurations. This
corresponds to a three dimensional field configuration of the form:
                                                              
                                                          dr 2
                                 M  N       2     2 2
                        GM N dx dx = u e −r dt + 2 + u (dy + e r dt)2
                                                          r
                                      1 (i)
                        φs = u s ,     F dxM ∧ dxN = 0 .                                      (3.4.25)
                                      2 MN
By making a coordinate change y = e z we can see that the metric depends only on the combination
ue2 . Thus all the scalars constructed out of the metric and the Riemann tensor must be a function of
this combination only. The entropy function will still depend on e and ue2 since the new coordinate
z will have e dependent period. We shall proceed by choosing e and
                                                 √
                                           l = 2 ue2 ,                                      (3.4.26)
                                  (3)
as independent variables. Since L0 is a scalar, and hence is a function of the combination ue2 only,
we can define a function h(l, ~u) via the relation
                                                                (3)
                                               h(l, ~u) = L0                                  (3.4.27)

evaluated in the background (3.4.25). Eq.(3.4.25) now gives
                                           √              (3)          1
                                 f0 ≡ 2π       − det G L0 =               g(l, ~u) ,          (3.4.28)
                                                                      |e|

                                                     66
where
                                                   π l3 h(l, ~u)
                                          g(l, ~u) =             .                        (3.4.29)
                                                        4
Plugging all these results back into eq.(3.4.16) we now get
                                                                    
                                                  1              πK
                                  E = 2π qb e − g(l, ~u) −             ,                  (3.4.30)
                                                 |e|               e

where
                                              1 −1
                                           qb = q −
                                                C qi qj .                              (3.4.31)
                                              4 ij
We need to extremize E with respect to l, us and e. The extremization with respect to l and us
clearly requires extremization of g(l, ~u) with respect to l and us . Defining
                                                   1
                                              C = − g(l, ~u)                              (3.4.32)
                                                   π
at the extremum of g we get                                
                                                    πC πK
                                      E = 2π qb e +     −     .                           (3.4.33)
                                                    |e|   e
We shall assume that C ≥ |K|. Extremizing (3.4.33) with respect to e we now get:
                                      s
                                        π(C − K)
                               e =                   for qb > 0 ,
                                             qb
                                      s
                                        π(C + K)
                                  =                  for qb < 0 .                         (3.4.34)
                                            |b
                                             q|

Furthermore, at the extremum,
                                                  r
                                                  cR qb
                                     E     = 2π          for qb > 0 ,
                                                r  6
                                                  cL |b
                                                      q|
                                           = 2π           for qb < 0 ,                    (3.4.35)
                                                    6
where we have defined
                              cL = 24 π (C + K) ,           cR = 24 π (C − K) .           (3.4.36)

(3.4.35) gives the entropy of extremal BTZ black hole as a function of the charges q and {qi }.
                                                                   (i)
Physically qi are the charges conjugate to the gauge fields AM while q labels the angular momentum
of the black hole.


                                                       67
    Note that the Chern-Simons term plays no role in the determination of the parameters l, ~u and

                                    cL + cR = 48 π C = −48 g(l, ~u) .                             (3.4.37)

This is a reflection of the fact that in three dimensions the effect of the Chern-Simons term on the
equations of motion involves covariant derivative of the Ricci tensor [48] which vanishes for BTZ
solution. On the other hand
                                            cL − cR = 48 π K                                      (3.4.38)

is insensitive to the detailed structure of the higher derivative terms and is determined completely by
the coefficient of the Chern-Simons term. This is a consequence of the fact that cL − cR is determined
by the parity odd part of the action evaluated on the near horizon geometry of the BTZ black hole,
and this contribution comes solely from the Chern-Simons term.


4     Black Holes with an AdS3 Factor in the Near Horizon
      Geometry
For some extremal black holes in string theory the AdS2 component of the near horizon geometry,
together with an internal circle, describes a locally AdS3 space. More accurately the near horizon
geometry of these extremal black holes correspond to that of extremal BTZ black holes of the type
discussed in §3.4 with the momentum along the internal circle representing the angular momentum
of the black hole. In such situations the enhanced isometry group of the AdS3 space allows us to get
a more detailed information about the entropy of the system and prove certain non-renormalization
theorems [20, 19, 21, 22] for the entropy of supersymmetric as well as non-supersymmetric black
holes. In this section we will outline these arguments and carry out a comparison between the two
approaches when both methods are available. Our discussion will follow closely the one given in [32].
   We shall divide the discussion into three parts. In §4.1 we shall describe the origin of the AdS3
factor and the information it provides for the black hole entropy. In §4.2 we shall discuss consequences
of this result for a specific class of black holes described in §3.1-3.3. In §4.3 we shall discuss possible
limitations of this approach.

4.1    Origin and consequences of AdS3 factor
We begin by reviewing the origin of the AdS3 geometry. For this we focus on the AdS2 part of the
near horizon geometry together with the electric flux through it. By choosing the basis of gauge


                                                    68
fields appropriately we can arrange that only one gauge field has non-vanishing electric field along
the AdS2 ; let us denote this gauge field strength by Fµν = ∂µ Aν − ∂ν Aµ . Then the relevant part of
the near horizon background takes the form:

                         ds2 ≡ gαβ dxα dxβ = v(−r 2 dt2 + r −2 dr 2 ),   Frt = e .              (4.1.1)

We shall assume that there is an appropriate duality frame in which we can regard the gauge field
component Aµ as coming from the component of a three dimensional metric along certain internal
circle labelled by a coordinate y. Let us use the convention in which the two dimensional metric gαβ
is related to the three dimensional metric GM N in the r, t, y space via the dimensional reduction
formula given in (3.4.5). In this case the solution (4.1.1) has the same structure as the one described
in §3.4. In particular if we choose
                                                 v = e2 ,                                       (4.1.2)
then the three dimensional metric in the r-t-y plane describes a locally AdS3 space. More precisely,
due to the compact nature of the coordinate y it becomes the quotient of the AdS3 space by a
translation by 2π along y. The effect of taking this quotient is to break the SO(2, 2) isometry group
of AdS3 to SO(2, 1) × U(1) [120], – the symmetries of an AdS2 × S 1 manifold. Since the physical
                                  p        √
radius of the y circle is given by Gyy = u, we expect that the effect of this symmetry breaking
will be small for large u.
   Let us for the time being ignore the effect of this symmetry breaking and suppose that the
background has full symmetries of the AdS3 space. In this case we expect that the dynamics of the
theory in this background will be governed by an effective three dimensional action, obtained by
treating all the other directions, including the angular coordinates labeling the non-compact part of
                                                                                                   (3)
space, as compact. As described in (3.4.1) the effective Lagrangian density will have a piece L0
which is a scalar function of the metric, Riemann tensor and covariant derivatives of the Riemann
tensor and a gravitational Chern-Simons term with coefficient K. The resulting entropy will also
have the same form as (3.4.35). The quantum number q now has the interpretation of electric charge
associated with the gauge field Aµ rather than angular momentum. We shall, for simplicity, ignore
the presence of additional gauge fields (with vanishing electric field but nonvanishing Wilson lines)
so that qb appearing in (3.4.35) is equal to q.
    Although the above analysis gives a general form of the entropy of a black hole with an AdS3
factor in the near horizon geometry, this analysis by itself does not determine the constants cL
and cR appearing in (3.4.36). While (cL − cR ) can be determined in terms of the coefficient of the
gravitational Chern-Simons term via eq.(3.4.38), the computation of cL + cR via eq.(3.4.37) will, in

                                                    69
general, require detailed knowledge of higher derivative terms in the action. However the situation
simplifies if the underlying three dimensional theory has at least (0,4) supersymmetry, – in this case
using AdS/CFT correspondence [121, 122, 123] one can also determine (cL + cR ) in terms of the
coefficient of a Chern-Simons term in the action [19, 20, 118]. The argument proceeds as follows.
The constants cL and cR given in (3.4.36) can be interpreted as the left- and right-moving central
charges of the two dimensional CFT living on the boundary of the AdS3 [124, 19, 20, 118]. If the
boundary theory happens to have (0, 4) supersymmetry, then the central charge cR is related to
the central charge of an SU(2)R current algebra which is also a part of the (0, 4) supersymmetry
algebra. Associated with the SU(2)R currents there will be SU(2) gauge fields in the bulk which
typically arise from the dimensional reduction of the full string theory on the transverse sphere and
the central charge of the SU(2)R current algebra will be determined in terms of the coefficient of the
gauge Chern-Simons term in the bulk theory. This determines cR in terms of the coefficient of the
gauge Chern-Simons term in the bulk theory [19, 20]. On the other hand we have already seen in
(3.4.38) that cL − cR is determined in terms of the coefficient K of the gravitational Chern-Simons
term. Since both cL and cR are determined in terms of the coefficients of the Chern-Simons term in
the bulk theory, they do not receive any higher derivative corrections. This completely determines
the entropy from (3.4.35).
   This result is somewhat surprising from the point of view of the bulk theory, since for a given
three dimensional theory of gravity the entropy does have non-trivial dependence on all the higher
derivative terms. Thus one could wonder how the dependence of the entropy on these higher deriva-
tive terms disappears by imposing the requirement of (0,4) supersymmetry. There is however a
simple explanation of this fact even in the bulk theory: (0,4) supersymmetry prevents the addition
of any higher derivative terms in the supergravity action (except those which can be removed by
field redefinition17 ) and hence the entropy computed using the three dimensional supergravity theory
with the Chern-Simons terms is the exact answer.
   This non-renormalization theorem may be proved as follows [126]. In AdS/CFT correspondence
the boundary operators dual to the fields in the supergravity multiplet are just the superconformal
currents associated with the (0,4) supersymmetry algebra. The correlation functions of these opera-
  17
     As has been discussed in [125], in a general theory of gravity in three dimensions with negative cosmological
constant we can find explicit field redefinition that removes all the higher derivative corrections. However this does
not rule out the possibility that the cosmological constant is renormalized during this field redefinition, – we need
additional input from supersymmetry to establish this. Furthermore as far as we can see this argument holds only
if the original action was local, containing powers of Riemann tensor and their covariant derivatives. In contrast
our argument based of AdS3 /CF T correspondence applies to the full quantum corrected effective action including
non-local terms as long as we have a global AdS3 space.


                                                         70
tors in the boundary theory are determined completely in terms of the central charges cL , cR of the
left-moving Virasoro algebra and the right-moving super-Virasoro algebra. Of these cR is related to
the central charge kR of the right-moving SU(2) currents which form the R-symmetry currents of
the super-Virasoro algebra and hence to the coefficient of the Chern-Simons term of the associated
SU(2) gauge fields in the bulk theory. On the other hand cL − cR is determined in terms of the coef-
ficient of the gravitational Chern-Simons term in the bulk theory. Thus the knowledge of the gauge
and gravitational Chern-Simons terms in the bulk theory determines all the correlation functions
of (0,4) superconformal currents in the boundary theory. Since by AdS/CFT correspondence [121]
these correlation functions in the boundary theory determine completely the boundary S-matrix of
the supergravity fields [122, 123], we conclude that the coefficients of the gauge and gravitational
Chern-Simons terms in the bulk theory determine completely the boundary S-matrix elements in
this theory.
    Now the boundary S-matrix elements are the only perturbative observables of the bulk theory.
Thus we expect that two different theories with the same boundary S-matrix must be related by a
field redefinition. Combining this with the observation made in the last paragraph we see that two
different gravity theories, both with (0,4) supersymmetry and the same coefficients of the gauge and
gravitational Chern-Simons terms, must be related by field redefinition. Put another way, once we
have constructed a classical supergravity theory with (0,4) supersymmetry and given coefficients of
the Chern-Simons terms, there cannot be any higher derivative corrections to the action involving
fields in the gravity supermultiplet except for those which can be removed by field redefinition. The
non-renormalization of the entropy of the BTZ black hole then follows trivially from this fact. The
complete theory in the bulk of course will have other matter multiplets whose action will receive
higher derivative corrections. However since restriction to the fields in the gravity supermultiplet
provides a consistent truncation of the theory, and since the BTZ black hole is embedded in this
subsector, its entropy will not be affected by these additional higher derivative terms.
   We shall now describe this unique (0,4) supergravity action and compute the constants cL and
cR from this action. The action was constructed in [127, 128] (generalizing earlier work of [129,
130, 131, 132] for supergravity actions based on Osp(p|2; R) × Osp(q|2; R) group) by regarding the
supergravity as a gauge theory based on SU(1, 1) × SU(1, 1|2) algebra. If ΓL and ΓR denote the
(super-)connections in the SU(1, 1) and SU(1, 1|2) algebras respectively, then the action is taken to
be a Chern-Simons action of the form:
                                  Z                                
                                      3               2
                     S = −aL        d x T r(ΓL ∧ dΓL + ΓL ∧ ΓL ∧ ΓL
                                                      3


                                                 71
                                    Z                                 
                                         3                2
                              +aR       d x Str(ΓR ∧ dΓR + ΓR ∧ ΓR ∧ ΓR ,                    (4.1.3)
                                                          3

where aL and aR are constants. Note that the usual metric degrees of freedom are encoded in the
connections ΓL and ΓR . Thus there is no obvious way to add SU(1, 1) × SU(1, 1|2) invariant higher
derivative terms in the action involving the field strengths associated with the connections ΓL and
ΓR . From this viewpoint also it is natural that the supergravity action does not receive any higher
derivative corrections.
    The bosonic fields of this theory include the metric GM N and an SU(2) gauge field AM (0 ≤
M ≤ 2), represented as a linear combination of 2 × 2 anti-hermitian matrices. After expressing the
action in the component notation and eliminating auxiliary fields using their equations of motion as
in [127, 128, 129, 130, 131] we arrive at the action
       Z                                                                            
                 √                                 kR M N P               2
  S= dx     3                       2
                   − det G R + 2m + K Ω3 (Γ) − b        ǫ     T r AM ∂N AP + AM AN AP        (4.1.4)
                                                     4π                     3

where
                              1  1                     1
                                = (aR + aL ),      K = (aL − aR ) ,                          (4.1.5)
                              m  2                     2
                                                        
                                                     1
                                    kR = 4πaR = 4π     −K ,                                  (4.1.6)
                                                     m
        b is the gravitational Chern-Simons term defined in (3.4.3).
and Ω3 (Γ)
  We shall now compute the constants cL and cR in this theory by using the general results of §3.4.
We have in this theory
                                    h(l) = (−6l−2 + 2m2 ) ,                                  (4.1.7)
                                         π
                                  g(l) = l3 (−6l−2 + 2m2 ) ,                                 (4.1.8)
                                         4
                                                1
                                           l0 =    ,                                         (4.1.9)
                                                m
                                                 1
                                            C=                                              (4.1.10)
                                                m
and                                                             
                           1                                  1
               cL = 24 π     + K = 24 π aL ,     cR = 24 π      − K = 24 π aR ,             (4.1.11)
                           m                                  m
where in (4.1.11) we have used (4.1.5). Using (4.1.6) we get

                                cR = 6 k R ,    cL = 48 π K + 6 kR .                        (4.1.12)


                                                 72
This gives the expressions for cL and cR in terms of the coefficients kR and K of the gauge and
gravitational Chern-Simons terms. By the argument outlined earlier, this result will not be modified
by higher derivative corrections in the theory.
   The argument given above can be easily generalized to the cases where the theory contains
additional U(1) gauge fields with non-degenerate Chern-Simons terms and the black hole is charged
under these gauge fields. The analysis of §3.4 shows that the expressions for cL and cR are independent
of the action involving these gauge fields and hence will continue to be given by eqs.(4.1.12). The
quantity qb appearing in the expression (3.4.35) the black hole entropy will however depend on the
additional gauge charges via eq.(3.4.31).
   The results for black hole entropy computed using the general arguments outlined above have
been verified by explicit computation in heterotic string theory after including all tree level four
derivative corrections [133, 44] and also in five dimensional supergravity theories [134, 135, 136] with
curvature squared corrections [137].

4.2      Applications to black holes in string theory
We shall now apply the observations made in §4.1 to the study of black holes discussed in §3.1.2-
§3.1.5. We shall use the second description of the theory, – as a ZZN orbifold of heterotic or type
II string theory on T 4 × Sb1 × S 1 , – and consider a black hole with n
                                                                       b units of momentum and −w b
units of fundamental string winding charge along Sb and N units of Kaluza-Klein monopole charge
                                                      1       ′

and −W ′ units of H-monopole charge associated with the circle S 1 . From (3.1.28) we see that such
a state has                                                  
                                        n
                                        b                    0
                                      0                  W′ 
                                    Q=
                                      w
                                          ,            P =                                    (4.2.1)
                                        b                  0 
                                        0                    N′
giving
                            Q2 = 2b
                                  nw,
                                    b        P 2 = 2 W ′ N ′,   Q· P = 0.                        (4.2.2)

    In order to apply the formalism described in §4.1 we need to ensure that the only electric field
carried by the solution comes from the dimensional reduction of the metric along a compact circle.
In this case however there are two sets of electric fields corresponding to the dimensional reduction
of the metric along Sb1 and the dimensionl reduction of the NS sector 2-form field along Sb1 . To avoid
this problem we take the heterotic or type II string theory on T 4 × S 1 / ZZN and dualize the 2-form
field BM N in the five remaining dimensions into a gauge field BM . We then compactify the resulting


                                                   73
theory on Sb1 . In this description the fundamental string winding charge w
                                                                          b along Sb1 appears as a
magnetic charge of the four dimensional gauge field Bµ . As a result the quantum numbers N ′ , W ′
and wb appear as magnetic charges whereas the quantum number n    b appears as electric charge.
   As in §4.1 we proceed by making the ansatz that the AdS2 factor in the near horizon geometry of
the black hole combines with Sb1 to produce an AdS3 factor. If this ansatz leads to a finite size AdS3
then our ansatz is self-consistent. In this case we can regard the near horizon geometry of the black
hole as that of an extremal BTZ black hole in a three dimensional theory of gravity, obtained by
compactifying the full string theory on (T 4 × S 1 )/ ZZN × S 2 . The three dimensional theory obtained
this way turns out to have a (0,4) supersymmetry and associated SU(2) gauge fields which come
from the isometries of S 2 . Thus due to the arguments outlined in §4.1, the central charges cL and cR
appearing in the formula for the entropy can be calculated from the knowledge of the Lorentz and
SU(2) Chern-Simons terms. The coefficients of the Chern-Simons terms in turn can be calculated by
carefully keeping track of various non-covariant terms appearing in the original Lagrangian density
as well those appearing in the process of dimensional reduction. The final result for N ′ , W ′ > 0,
w
b < 0 is [19, 20, 22]

                                        cR = −6(N ′ W ′ w
                                                        b + 2b
                                                             αw),
                                                               b
                                        cL = −6(N ′ W ′ w
                                                        b + 4b
                                                             αw)
                                                               b ,                              (4.2.3)

where α
      b = 1 for heterotic string theory and 0 for type II string theory. On the other hand with the
convention we have chosen the quantity q appearing in (3.4.35) is given by

                                                q=n
                                                  b.                                            (4.2.4)

Thus if we take the supersymmetric configuration

                                     N ′ , W ′ > 0,        n
                                                           b, w
                                                              b < 0,                            (4.2.5)

then from (3.4.35) we get
                                               p
                                    SBH = 2π    (N ′ W ′ + 4b
                                                            α) w
                                                               bnb.                             (4.2.6)

This agrees with (3.1.59) and (3.2.31). By switching on the electric charges associated with various
gauge fields in the way described in §3.4 and using T-duality invariance one can in fact argue that the
more general result (3.1.53) (and the corresponding result (3.2.26) in N = 2 supergravity theory) is
                  p
exact in the limit Q2 P 2 − (Q · P )2 >> P 2 . This exact agreement for supersymmetric black holes
is somewhat mysterious since neither the Gauss-Bonnet term nor the N = 2 supergravity analysis

                                                      74
described in §3.2 captures the complete set of terms even at the four derivative level. Neither do they
satisfy the condition which led to (4.2.6), namely neither of these theories come from dimensional
reduction on Sb1 of a supersymmetric action in one higher dimension.
   For the non-supersymmetric configuration

                                      N ′ , W ′, n
                                                 b > 0,   w
                                                          b < 0,                                  (4.2.7)

we get
                                     ns
                                               p
                                    SBH = 2π    (N ′ W ′ + 2b
                                                            α)|b
                                                               nw|
                                                                 b .                              (4.2.8)

This does not agree with either (3.1.61) or (3.2.35).
   As long as the near horizon geometry of the black hole is given by a locally AdS3 space, the
results (4.2.6), (4.2.8) are exact. Indeed, this has now been verified by explicit computation of the
black hole entropy [44, 133] keeping all the four derivative terms in the effective action [138, 139] and
comparing the result for extremal black hole entropy with the expansion of (4.2.6), (4.2.8) up to first
non-leading order in 1/|N ′ W ′ |. In §4.3 we shall examine under what condition this approximation
breaks down.

4.3      Limitations of AdS3 based approach
Clearly the existence of an AdS3 factor in the near horizon geometry gives us results which are much
stronger than the ones which can be derived based on the existence of only an AdS2 factor. In this
section we shall discuss the approximation under which (3.4.35) holds and possible corrections to
this formula.
    The main underlying assumption behind (3.4.35) is that the black hole solution is described by
an effective three dimensional theory of gravity with a generally covariant action in three dimensions
of the form (3.4.1). In this case we can look for solutions in this three dimensional theory with
SO(2,2) isometry which corresponds to an AdS3 space. However this SO(2,2) isometry of the near
horizon background is only an approximate symmetry since due to the compactness of the angular
coordinate of the BTZ black hole the actual space is a quotient of the AdS3 space by the group
of 2π translation along this coordinate. The true symmetry of the background is a subgroup of
SO(2,2) that commutes with the translation and this is simply SO(2,1)×U(1), – the product of the
isometry group of AdS2 and the group of translations along the compact direction. Let us denote
the coordinate along this compact direction by y. As long as the physical radius of the y coordinate
is large we expect that the effect of the breaking of SO(2,2) isometry will be small and (3.4.35) will


                                                    75
be valid. However if this radius is of order unity, then the SO(2,2) symmetry of AdS3 to be broken
strongly and it will be more appropriate to regard the background as a two dimensional background
by dimensionally reducing the theory along y. The effective two dimensional action governing the
dynamics in AdS2 space, besides having a ‘local’ piece of the form (3.4.1) with three dimensional
general coordinate invariance, contains additional terms which cannot be written as dimensional
reduction of a generally covariant three dimensional action.18 There are various sources of these
additional terms, e.g. due to the quantization of the momenta along the y direction, contribution to
the effective action from various euclidean branes wrapping the y circle, etc. In the presence of such
terms there will be additional contribution to the entropy which are not of the form (3.4.35). These
additional corrections can be interpreted as due to the corrections to the full string theory partition
function on thermal AdS3 [21, 22] or equivalently as corrections to the Cardy formula in the CFT
living on the boundary of AdS3 , but there is no simple way to calculate these corrections without
knowing the details of this CFT.
    We will illustrate this in the context of the black holes discussed in §4.2. As can be seen from
eqs.(3.1.56), (3.1.58) for α
                           b = 0, in the leading supergravity approximation the near horizon values
             b and R of Sb1 and S 1 and field S representing square of the inverse string coupling are
of the radii R
given by                           s                   s                      s
                             b=        n
                                       b                   W′                      n
                                                                                   bwb
                             R           ,       R=           ,        uS =              .                       (4.3.1)
                                       w
                                       b                   N′                     N ′W ′

From this we see that if we take |b                                                    b of the circle Sb1
                                  n| large keeping the other charges fixed, the radius R
becomes large. Thus we expect that in this limit the SO(2, 2) isometry of the near horizon geometry
will be a good approximation and the entropy will have the form given in (4.2.6) even after inclusion
of higher derivative corrections. However when all charges are of the same order then the radius
of Sb1 becomes of order unity and the higher derivative corrections to the action will contain terms
which cannot be regarded as the dimensional reduction of a three dimensional general coordinate
invariant action of the form given in (3.4.2). Consequently the higher derivative corrections to the
entropy will cease to be of the form given in (4.2.6).
   This can be seen explicitly by taking into account the effect of the four derivative Gauss-Bonnet
term in the four dimensional effective action describing heterotic string compactification on T 4 ×
  18
    This can be seen even in ordinary Kaluza-Klein compactification of flat space-time. If the space-time contains a
compact circle of radius R, then the quantum effective action will typically involve terms with complicated dependence
on R. Since the dimensional reduction of a higher dimensional generally covariant action on a circle of radius R produces
a Lagrangian density proportional to R, not all the terms in the quantum effective action can be viewed as coming
from the dimensional reduction of a higher dimensional generally covariant action.


                                                           76
Sb1 × S 1 . An expression for the entropy of a black hole in the presence of a Gauss-Bonnet term has
been given in (3.1.49). For large |b n|, uS given in (4.3.1) is large. In this case we can approximate
φ(ua , uS ) by its large uS limit given in (3.1.50) and the corresponding entropy (3.1.59) agrees with
the result (4.2.6). However if all the charges are of the same order, then uS given in (4.3.1) is of
order unity and we cannot approximate φ(ua , uS ) by its large uS limit. Instead we need to use the
complete expression given in (3.1.49) with Q2 , P 2 and Q · P given in (4.2.2):
                                                             s          !
                                    √                             n
                                                                  b w
                                                                    b
                          SBH ≃ 2π n    b ′ W ′ + 64π 2φ 0,
                                      bwN                                 .                         (4.3.2)
                                                                 N ′W ′

For the specific case of heterotic string theory on T 4 × Sb1 × S 1 we get from (3.1.40), (3.1.41) for the
case M = K3, N = 1,
                                                 3                    4
                                                                        
                                 φ(a, S) = −         ln 2S|η(a + iS)|     ,                         (4.3.3)
                                               16π 2
up to an additive constant. This gives
                                                           s                 s         !4 
                                                                  n
                                                                  bw b             n
                                                                                   bw b
       ∆SBH ≃ 64 π 2 φ(0, uS )|u =√|bnw/N
                                      b ′ W ′|
                                               = −12 ln 2             η      i            .       (4.3.4)
                                 S                               N W′
                                                                   ′              N W′
                                                                                    ′



This clearly has a complicated nb-dependence and is not in agreement with the simple form (4.2.6).
   It is instructive to study the origin of the terms which break the SO(2,2) symmetry of AdS3 in
this specific example. First of all (4.3.4) contains a correction term proportional to ln S ∼ ln Nnb′ W
                                                                                                      b
                                                                                                      w
                                                                                                        ′ .

This can be traced to the effect of replacing the continuous integral over the momentum along S 1
by a discrete sum. There are also additional corrections involving powers of e−2πuS . These can be
traced to the effect of Euclidean 5-branes wrapped on K3 × Sb1 × S 1 [66]. Since the 5-brane has one
of its legs along Sb1 , it breaks the SO(3,1) isometry of Euclidean AdS3 .
   The above example also illustrates the basic difference between the approximation schemes used
by the AdS3 and AdS2 based approaches. The AdS3 based approach is useful when we take the
momentum along the AdS3 circle S 1 to be large keeping the other charges fixed. In this limit the
size of S 1 becomes large (see eq.(4.3.1)) and hence the SO(2, 2) symmetry of AdS3 is broken weakly.
As a result the entropy has the form (3.4.35). In the CFT living on the boundary of AdS3 , this
corresponds to a state with large L0 (or L̄0 ) eigenvalue, keeping the central charge fixed. This is
precisely the limit in which the Cardy formula for the degeneracy of states is valid. On the other
hand the AdS2 based approach is useful if all the charges are large since in this limit the AdS2 has
small curvature, and we can use the derivative expansion of the effective action to find a systematic
expansion of the entropy and the entropy function in inverse powers of charges.

                                                     77
4.4    Small black hole revisited
Given this understanding of the range of validity of the AdS3 based approach, let us now return to
the case of small black holes. In this case we have N ′ = 0, W ′ = 0. Eq.(4.2.6) shows that for n
                                                                                                bwb > 0,
ı.e. for supersymmetric small black holes, the entropy is given by
                                                   √
                                           SBH = 4π αbwb
                                                      bn ,                                        (4.4.1)

if we take the large n
                     b limit at fixed w.
                                      b In fact since we have already argued earlier that for large
charges the result for the entropy depends only on the combination Q2 = 2b
                                                                         nw,
                                                                           b (4.4.1) must be valid
for large n
          bw.
            b For heterotic string theory α b = 1 and the result is in perfect agreement with the
statistical entropy (3.3.1). However for type II string theory α
                                                               b = 0 and the result is in disagreement
with the statistical entropy formula (3.3.2).
   The origin of this discrepancy for type II string theories is not completely clear at this stage.
Since (4.4.1) gives SBH = 0, the most conservative point of view would be that one cannot find a
solution to the equations of motion with the ansatz that there is an underlying locally AdS3 factor.
This still leaves open the possibility that type II string theory admits a small black hole solution
whose near horizon geometry has an AdS2 factor, and finite entropy which can be computed using
the entropy function method after taking into account all the higher derivative corrections to the tree
level effective action. A different approach to this problem has been described in [105, 106, 107, 108].
    One can also carry out a similar analysis for non-supersymmetric small black holes. If we set
N ′ = W ′ = 0 in eq.(4.2.8) we get
                                       ns
                                               √ p
                                      SBH  = 2 2π α  b|bnw|
                                                         b .                               (4.4.2)

For αb = 1 this agrees with the statistical entropy of these black holes computed from the spectrum
of elementary string states carrying right-moving excitations with L̄0 = |b  nw|
                                                                              b and no left-moving
excitations. However for α
                         b = 0 the result again fails to agree with the statistical entropy of small
                                                                           √ p
non-supersymmetric black holes in type II string theory which is given by 2 2π |b   nw|.
                                                                                      b


5     Precision Counting of Dyon States
In this section we shall compute the statistical entropy of a class of dyonic black holes in the theories
described in §3.1.2. We shall carry out our analysis by first counting states of a configuration carrying
                         ~ P~ ) in a specific corner of the moduli space and then extend the results
specific charge vectors (Q,
to more general charges. In §5.1 we shall describe this specific microscopic configuration. Also,


                                                   78
in order to guide the reader through the rest of the section, we shall summarize in this section
the results of §5.2-§5.7. In §5.2 we carry out the computation of BPS states for the microscopic
configuration described in §5.1. In §5.3 we describe how our results can be extended to more general
charge vectors. In §5.4 we discuss how the spectrum of the theory could change discontinuously as
we move across walls of marginal stability in the moduli space, and use these results to determine
the region of moduli space in which our formula for the degeneracy of dyons remains valid. In
§5.5 we study T- and S-duality transformation properties of the degeneracy formula, and use the
requirement of duality invariance to determine how the degeneracy changes as we move across a
wall of marginal stability. In §5.6 we calculate the statistical entropy of the system, – given by the
logarithm of the degeneracy of states, – by expanding the result of §5.2 in a series expansion in
inverse powers of charges and compare the results with the results for black hole entropy given in
§3.1.4. Finally in §5.7 we demonstrate how the change in the degeneracy across walls of marginal
stability can be related to (dis)appearance of 2-centered black holes as we cross the marginal stability
walls [140, 141, 142, 143, 144, 145, 146, 147].
    Throughout this section we shall set α′ = 1 unless mentioned otherwise. Our counting of states
will follow [6, 7, 8]. The original formula for the degeneracy was first proposed in [9] for the special
case of heterotic string theory compactified on T 6 , and extended to more general models in [10,11,12].
Various alternative approaches to proving these formulæ have been explored in [13, 14, 15, 16, 17].

5.1       Summary of the results
As in §3.1.2 we consider type IIB string theory on M × Se1 ×S 1 where M is either K3 or T 4 , and mod
out this theory by a ZZN symmetry group generated by a transformation g that involves 1/N unit of
shift along the circle S 1 together with an order N transformation e
                                                                   g in M. e
                                                                           g is chosen in such a way
that the final theory has N = 4 supersymmetry. In keeping with the convention described below
(3.1.29) we shall take the coordinate radii of S 1 / ZZN and Se1 to be 1. In this convention the original
S 1 before orbifolding has coordinate radius N and the ZZN action involves 2π translation along S 1 .
Since under this translation various modes get transformed by e
                                                              g twist instead of remaining invariant,
the momentum along S 1 is quantized in multiples of 1/N instead of being integers. Following [13]
we consider in this theory a configuration with a single D5-brane wrapped on M × S 1 , Q1 D1-branes
wrapped on S 1 , a single Kaluza-Klein monopole associated with the circle Se1 with negative magnetic
charge, momentum −n/N along S 1 and momentum J along Se1 .19 Since a D5-brane wrapped on
M carries, besides the D5-brane charge, −β units of D1-brane charge with β given by the Euler
 19
      In short, we have a BMPV black hole [148] at the center of Taub-NUT space.

                                                        79
character of M divided by 24 [149], the net D1-brane charge carried by the system is Q1 − β.
   As has already been discussed in §3.1.2, there is a second description of the theory obtained by
an S-duality transformation of type IIB string theory, followed by a T-duality transformation along
Se1 that takes us to type IIA string theory on (M × Sb1 × S 1 )/ ZZN , and finally a string-string duality
transformation that takes us to heterotic (type IIA) string theory on (T 4 × Sb1 ×S 1 )/ ZZN for M = K3
(M = T 4 ). By following the duality transformation rules and the sign conventions given in appendix
A we can find the physical interpretation of various charges carried by the system in the second
description. We find that it corresponds to a state with momentum −n/N along S 1 , a single Kaluza-
Klein monopole associated with Sb1 , (−Q1 + β) units of NS 5-brane charge along T 4 × S 1 , −J units of
NS 5-brane charge along T 4 × Sb1 and a single fundamental string wound along S 1 [6]. In particular
the Kaluza-Klein monopole charge associated with Se1 in the first description gets mapped to the
fundamental string winding number along S 1 in the second description and the D5-brane wrapped
on M × S 1 in the first description gets mapped to Kaluza-Klein monopole charge associated with
Sb1 in the second description. Using the convention of (3.1.28) we see that this corresponds to the
charge vectors20                                                      
                                           0                      Q1 − β
                                        −n/N                   −J 
                                     Q=
                                        0 ,
                                                            P =
                                                                 1 .
                                                                                                                (5.1.1)
                                          −1                        0
This gives
                              Q2 = 2n/N,           P 2 = 2(Q1 − β),          Q·P =J.                             (5.1.2)

In the rest of this section we shall summarize the results of §5.2 - §5.7.
    We denote by d(Q, ~ P~ ) the number of bosonic minus fermionic quarter BPS supermultiplets car-
rying a given set of charges (Q, ~ P~ ), a supermultiplet being considered bosonic (fermionic) if it is
obtained by tensoring the basic 64 dimensional quarter BPS supermultiplet, with helicity ranging
from − 23 to 23 , with a supersymmetry singlet bosonic (fermionic) state. For the charge vector given in
(5.1.1) and in the region of the moduli space where the type IIB string coupling in the first description
  20
    Ref. [6] actually considered a more general charge vector where Q5 , representing the number of D5-branes wrapped
along K3 × S 1 , was arbitrary and found that d(Q,~ P~ ), expressed as a function of Q2 , P 2 and Q · P , continues to be
given by the same function (5.1.3). However the analysis of dyon spectrum becomes simpler for Q5 = 1. For this
reason we have set Q5 = 1. We shall comment on the more general case at the end of §5.3 (see paragraph containing
eq.(5.3.32).).




                                                           80
                                         ~ P~ ) is21
of the theory is small, our result for d(Q,
                                         Z
                  ~  ~          Q·P +1 1                         2    2                 1
                d(Q, P ) = (−1)             deρ de   v e−πi(N ρeQ +eσP /N +2evQ·P )
                                                  σ de                                         ,                       (5.1.3)
                                       N C                                          e ρ, σ
                                                                                    Φ(e  e, e
                                                                                            v)

where C is a three real dimensional subspace of the three complex dimensional space labelled by
(e
 ρ, σ  v) ≡ (e
    e, e     ρ1 + ie
                   ρ2 , σ
                        e1 + ie
                              σ2 , e
                                   v1 + ie
                                         v2 ), given by

                                                 ρe2 = M1 ,        σ
                                                                   e2 = M2 ,      v2 = −M3 ,
                                                                                  e
                                       0 ≤ ρe1 ≤ 1,          0≤σ
                                                               e1 ≤ N,           0≤e
                                                                                   v1 ≤ 1 ,                            (5.1.4)

M1 , M2 and M3 being large but fixed positive numbers with M3 << M1 , M2 , and

          e ρ, σ
          Φ(e     v) = e2πi(eαρe+eγ σe+ev)
               e, e
                 Y 1 NY−1             Y                                          PN−1 −2πisl/N (r,s)
                                                                                      e       cb     (4k ′ l−j 2 )
               ×                                [1 − exp {2πi(k ′ σ
                                                                  e + le
                                                                       ρ + je
                                                                            v )}] s=0                              .
                 b=0 r=0 k ∈zz+ N ,l∈zz,j∈2zz+b
                           ′       r
                                   k′ ,l≥0,j<0 for k′ =l=0

                                                                                                                       (5.1.5)
                       (r,s)
The coefficients cb            (u) have been defined through eqs. (B.2), (B.6):
                                       1
                                       X           X
                    (r,s)                                      (r,s)
                F           (τ, z) ≡                          cb       (4n − j 2 )e2πinτ +2πijz
                            b=0 j∈2zz+b,n∈zz/N
                 1                                                      
                = T rRR;egr eg s (−1)FL +FR e2πiτ L0 e−2πiτ̄ L̄0 e2πiFL z ,                       0 ≤ r, s ≤ N − 1 ,   (5.1.6)
                 N
                                   g r twisted RR-sector states in the two dimensional superconformal
where T rRR;egr denotes trace over e
field theory with target space M, FL , FR denote the left- and right-handed fermion numbers in
this world-sheet theory, and Ln and L̄n denote the left- and right-handed Virasoro generators. The
additive constants in L0 and L̄0 are adjusted so that supersymmetric ground states in the RR sector
have L0 = L̄0 = 0, – this is a convention we shall follow throughout the rest of the article. The
                                                                                  (r,s)
constants α
          e and e
                γ are given in terms of the coefficients cb (u) via eqs.(B.20), (C.20):
                                                               
                                            (r,s)        (r,s)
                                Qr,s = N c0 (0) + 2 c1 (−1) ,                                                          (5.1.7)
  21
     The overall factor of (−1)Q·P +1 was left out in the analysis of [6, 7, 8]. The (−1)Q·P factor appeared previously
in [15, 150] and reflects the difference in statistics between the four and five dimensional viewpoint for modes carrying
odd units of Q · P quantum number. As we shall see in (5.2.21), the −1 factor appears from the spectrum of bound
state of a D1-D5 system to the Kaluza-Klein monopole.


                                                                        81
                        N −1
           1          1 X            e−2πis/N                                     1          1
       α
       e=     Q0,0 −         Q0,s                  ,                   γ=
                                                                       e             Q0,0 =     χ(M) .          (5.1.8)
          24N        2N s=1       (1 − e−2πis/N )2                               24N        24N
                                e satisfies the periodicity conditions
   As has been shown in (C.24), Φ

                      e ρ + 1, σ
                      Φ(e               e ρ, σ
                               e, ve) = Φ(e  e + N, e    e ρ, σ
                                                    v) = Φ(e  e, e        e ρ, σ
                                                                 v + 1) = Φ(e  e, e
                                                                                  v) .                          (5.1.9)

                            ~ P~ ) as
Using this we can express d(Q,
                                                                                        
                               ~ P~ ) = (−1)Q·P +1 g            N 2 1
                             d(Q,                                 Q,    P 2, Q · P           ,                 (5.1.10)
                                                                2    2N

                                                                             e ρ, σ
where g(m, n, p) are the coefficients of Fourier expansion of the function 1/Φ(e  e, e
                                                                                     v ):
                                     1           X
                                             =           g(m, n, p) e2πi(m ρe+n σe+p ev) .                     (5.1.11)
                                e ρ, σ
                                Φ(e  e, e
                                        v)       m,n,p


    Although the formulæ (5.1.3), (5.1.10) were originally derived for charge vectors of the form
(5.1.1), we show in §5.3 that the same formula holds for a more general class of charge vectors for
weak type IIB string coupling in the first description [151]. In the subspace V introduced in (3.1.28)
this general charge vector takes the form
                                 
                  k3                 l3
                k4               l4 
          Q=        
                k5  ,      P =  1 ,
                                              k4 ∈ ZZ/N, ki , li ∈ ZZ otherwise .            (5.1.12)
                 −1                  0

   In writing down the formula (5.1.3) we have made an implicit assumption. Eqs.(5.1.3) and (5.1.10)
are equivalent only if the sums over m, n, p in (5.1.11) are convergent for large imaginary ρe, σ
                                                                                                e and
−ev , – the region in which the contour C lies. This in particular requires that the sum over m and
n are bounded from below, and that for fixed m and n the sum over p is bounded from above. By
examining the formula (5.1.5) for Φe we can see that the sum over m and n are indeed bounded from
                                                                        (r,s)
below. Furthermore, using the fact that the coefficients cb                     (u) are non-zero only for 4u ≥ −b2 , we
can verify that with the exception of the contribution from the k ′ = l = 0 term in this product,
the other terms, when expanded in a power series expansion in e2πieρ , e2πieσ and e2πiev , does have the
form of (5.1.11) with p bounded from above (and below) for fixed m, n. However for the k ′ = l = 0
term, which gives a contribution e−2πiev /(1 − e−2πiev )2 , there is an ambiguity in carrying out the
series expansion. We could either use the form given above and expand the denominator in a series
expansion in e−2πiev , or express it as e2πiev /(1 − e2πiev )2 and expand it in a series expansion in e2πiev . As

                                                            82
will be discussed below (5.2.21), depending on the angle between S 1 and Se1 in the first description,
only one of these expansions produce the degeneracy formula correctly via (5.1.11) [6]. The physical
spectrum actually changes as this angle passes through 90◦ since at this point the system is only
marginally stable. On the other hand our degeneracy formula (5.1.3), (5.1.4) implicitly requires that
we expand this factor in powers of e−2πiev since only in this case the sum over p in (5.1.11) is bounded
from above for fixed m, n. Thus as it stands the formula is valid for a specific range of values of the
angle between S 1 and Se1 . In the second description of the system this corresponds to a region in the
moduli space where the axion field a, obtained by dualizing the NS sector 2-form field, has a positive
                                                                    ~ P~ ) is obtained by expanding
sign. For the negative sign of the axion the correct formula for d(Q,
e−2πiev /(1 − e−2πiev )2 in positive powers of e2πiev . In this case the sum over p in (5.1.11) is bounded
from below, and in (5.1.3) we need to take a different contour C       b to get the correct formula for the
degeneracy:

                                        ρe2 = M1 ,   σ
                                                     e2 = M2 ,     ve2 = M3 ,
                               0 ≤ ρe1 ≤ 1,    0≤σ
                                                 e1 ≤ N,         0≤e
                                                                   v1 ≤ 1 ,                              (5.1.13)

where M1 , M2 and M3 are large positive numbers with M3 << M1 , M2 .
  It turns out that walls of marginal stability, – codimension one subspaces of the asymptotic
moduli space on which the BPS mass of the system becomes equal to the sum of masses of two or
more other states carrying the same total charge, – are quite generic for quarter BPS states in N = 4
supersymmetric string theories [152]. The shapes of these walls have been analyzed in detail in §5.4.
For fixed values of the other moduli, the marginal stability walls in the axion-dilaton moduli space are
either circles or straight lines, with the property that they never intersect in the interior of the upper
half plane, but can intersect either at i∞ or at rational points on the real axis. Thus a given domain
bounded by the walls of marginal stability has vertices either at rational points on the real axis or at
i∞. As we vary the other moduli, the shapes of the walls in the axion-dilaton moduli space changes,
but the vertices do not change. Thus every domain may be given an invariant characterization by
specifying the vertices of the domain. While comparing these domains for different states carrying
different charges and / or different asymptotic values of the other moduli, we shall call them the
same if their vertices in the axion-dilaton moduli space coincide.
    We expect the spectrum of quarter BPS states to change discontinuously as the asymptotic moduli
fields pass through any of these walls of marginal stability.22 Thus the expression for the degeneracy
  22
    What we refer to as a wall is actually a codimension one subspace of the full moduli space. If a state becomes
marginally stable on a surface of codimension ≥ 2, then we can always move around this subspace in going from one
point to another and hence the spectrum cannot change discontinuously.

                                                       83
given above holds only in a finite domain of the moduli space, bounded by the walls of marginal
stability. More precisely, we have the formula for the degeneracy in two different domains separated
by the domain wall on which the axion field in the second description vanishes. We denote by R
the domain in which the original formula (5.1.3), (5.1.4) is valid, and by L the domain in which the
same formula with the modified integration contour given in (5.1.13) is valid. An important question
is: how does the degeneracy formula look inside other domains? It turns out that invariance of the
theory under S- and T-duality symmetries gives non-trivial information about the degeneracy formula
inside other domains and for other charge vectors. However before describing the logic behind this
analysis, we need to say a few words about duality invariance.
   First note that that although (5.1.3) has been expressed as a function of the T-duality invariant
                                                                                      ~ P~ described in
combinations P 2 , Q2 and Q · P , it was derived initially for special charge vectors Q,
(5.1.1), and extended to more general charge vectors of the form (5.1.12) in §5.3. Even then this is
not the most general charge vector of the theory. One can try to extend this to more general charge
vectors using T-duality symmetry of the theory. However here we encounter two problems. First of
all two charge vectors carrying the same values of P 2, Q2 and Q · P may not necessarily be related
by a T-duality transformation.23 In that case the degeneracy of states for these two charge vectors
could be different. An example of this is that a state carrying fundamental heterotic string winding
charge w ′ along S 1 with w ′ 6= 0 mod N can never be related to a state carrying w ′ = 0 mod N even if
they have the same values of Q2 , P 2 and Q · P , since the former carries twisted sector electric charge
and the latter carries untwisted sector electric charge. Thus the degeneracy formula we have derived
holds at best for charges which are in the same T-duality orbit as the general charge vector (5.1.12).
Second, even though we expect T-duality to be a symmetry of the theory, we should remember that it
acts not only on the charges but also on the asymptotic moduli. Had the spectrum been independent
of the asymptotic moduli, we could have demanded that the spectrum remains invariant under T-
duality transformation of the charges. However if a T-duality transformation takes the asymptotic
moduli fields across a wall of marginal stability, then all we can say is that the spectrum remains
unchanged under a simultaneous T-duality transformation of the moduli fields and the charges. We
show in §5.5 that a T-duality transformation on the moduli space preserves the domains bounded
by marginal stability walls in the sense that it preserves the vertices of the domain while changing
the shapes of the walls. Hence we do expect that the degeneracy formula within a given domain
characterized by a fixed set of vertices will be invariant under a T-duality transformation acting on
  23
    Generically they are related by a continuous T-duality transformation but only a discrete subgroup of this is a
genuine symmetry of the theory.



                                                        84
the charges only. In the subpace V of electric and magnetic charges introduced in (3.1.28), – spanned
by the momenta, fundamental string winding charge, H- and Kaluza-Klein monopole charges along
the circles Sb1 and S 1 in the second description, – the T-duality orbit of (5.1.12) has been analyzed
at the end of §5.3. We find that the orbits contain four dimensional electric and magnetic charge
        ~ and P~ in this subspace satisfying charge quantization laws and the following additional
vectors Q
restrictions:

   1. The electric charge vector must correspond to the charge carried by a g twisted state, ı.e. in
       the second description the fundamental string winding charge −k6 along S 1 must be 1 mod N.

   2. The Kaluza-Klein monopole charge l5 associated with the circle Sb1 in the second description
      must be 1 mod N.
                                                                          
                                                         k3                  l3
                                                        k4                l4 
   3. The electric and the magnetic charge vectors Q =                    
                                                        k5  and P =  l5  must satisfy the
                                                         k6                  l6
      primitivity conditions:

                          g.c.d.(Nk3 l4 − Nk4 l3 , k5 l6 − k6 l5 , k3 l5 − k5 l3 + k4 l6 − k6 l4 ) = 1 .   (5.1.14)

These are necessary conditions for the charge vectors to be in the orbit of (5.1.12), but we have not
proven that these conditions are sufficient. Thus our formula (5.1.3), (5.1.4) holds in the domain
R for charge vectors satisfying these criteria, and possibly some additional criteria.24 . For the same
charge vectors, the formula (5.1.3) with the contour C replaced by a new contour Cb given in (5.1.13),
hold in the domain L.
   For the choice M = K3, ı.e. theories for which the second description is based on orbifolds of
heterotic string theory, we can relax the conditions somewhat by taking an initial configuration with
multiple D5-branes [6], with the number of D1 and D5-branes being relatively prime. This analysis
has been described in appendix E and, after being combined with the analysis of §5.3, shows that
our degeneracy formula (5.1.3), (5.1.4) holds in the domain R for a general charge vector of the form
                          
           k3                 l3
          k4              l4 
    Q=       
          k5  ,     P =       
                            l5  ,      k4 ∈ ZZ/N, ki , li ∈ ZZ otherwise, g.c.d.(l3 , l5 ) = 1 .
           −1                 0
                                                                                              (5.1.15)
  24
    Possible dependence of the degeneracy formula on invariants other than the continuous T-duality invariants have
been anticipated in [153]

                                                         85
Thus the degeneracy formula will continue to hold for any charge vector related to (5.1.15) by a
T-duality transformation. This allows us to relax the condition 2 on l5 given above. This also relaxes
the condition (5.1.14) to

                  g.c.d.{ki lj − kj li , Nk4 ls − Nks l4 , k4 l6 − k6 l4 ;   i, j = 3, 5, 6, s = 3, 5} = 1 .   (5.1.16)

It may also be possible to relax these conditions in a similar manner for orbifolds of type IIB string
theory on T 4 × Se1 × S 1 by taking multiple D5-branes as in the case of K3 × Se1 × S 1 . However a
careful analysis, taking into account the dynamics of Wilson lines on multiple D5-branes, has not
been carried out so far.
   Given this, we can now study the consequences of S-duality invariance. It turns out that unlike T-
duality, typically an S-duality transformation takes us from one domain to another. Thus invariance
under S-duality can be used to derive the formula for the degeneracy in domains other than the
original domain where it was computed. We find that the degeneracies inside the other domains
formally look the same as (5.1.3) but the contour C over which we need to carry out the integration
is different in different domains. On the other hand there are a few S-duality transformations which
preserve a given domain. These must be symmetries of the degeneracy formula, – namely two charge
vectors related by such an S-duality transformation must have the same degeneracy. This is indeed
borne out by explicit computation. These issues have been discussed in detail in §5.5.
    Finally let us turn to the comparison between statistical entropy – defined as the logarithm of
the degeneracy of states – with the black hole entropy. For this we need to extract the behaviour
of the degeneracy d(Q,~ P~ ) for large charges. By performing one of the integrals in (5.1.3) by picking
up residues at the poles of the integrand, and other two integrals by saddle point approximation, we
can extract this behaviour. The result is that up to first non-leading order, the entropy is given by
extremizing a statistical entropy function

     eB (~τ ) =    π
    −Γ                |Q − τ P |2 − ln g(τ ) − ln g(−τ̄ ) − (k + 2) ln(2τ2 ) + constant + O(Q−2 )              (5.1.17)
                  2τ2
with respect to real and imaginary parts of the complex variable τ = τ1 + iτ2 . The functon g(τ )
and the constant k are the same as the ones which appear in the expression (3.1.40) for the function
φ(a, S) multiplying the coefficient of the Gauss-Bonnet term in the low energy effective action.
   With the identification τ = ua + iuS the statistical entropy function (5.1.17) matches the black
hole entropy function of the same theory given in (3.1.47). Thus the statistical entropy and the black
hole entropy, given by the values of the corresponding entropy functions at their extrema, also agree
to this order.

                                                            86
                               ~ P~ ) changes across the walls of marginal stability, one might wonder
   Since the expression for d(Q,
                           ~ P~ behaviour of d(Q,
how this affects the large Q,                   ~ P~ ). One finds that these changes are exponentially
small compared to the leading contribution. Nevertheless one could ask if the changes in d(Q,    ~ P~ )
across walls of marginal stability can be seen on the black hole side. It turns out that this is indeed
possible. First of all, due to the attractor mechanism the entropy of a single centered extremal black
hole of the kind analyzed in §3.1 does not change as the asymptotic values of the moduli vary across
a wall of marginal stability. However on the black hole side the contribution to the total entropy
comes not only from single centered black holes but also from multi-centered black holes carrying the
same total charge. It turns out that as we cross a wall of marginal stability, typically a two centered
black hole solution (dis)appears, ı.e. these solutions exist only on one side of the marginal stability
wall [140, 141, 142, 144, 145, 146]. As a result there is a change in the total entropy on the black
hole side as well. This change precisely agrees with the result predicted from the exact degeneracy
formula [154, 150]. We shall illustrate this in §5.7.

5.2     The counting
We shall now describe the counting of BPS states of the configuration described in (5.1.1), – this
                                                               ~ P~ ). For this configuration the charges
will eventually lead to the expressions (5.1.3), (5.1.4) for d(Q,
 ~ P~ ) are labelled by the set of integers Q1 , n and J. The other two charges, namely the number
(Q,
of D5-branes along M × S 1 and the number of Kaluza-Klein monopoles associated with the circle
Se1 in the first description have been taken to be 1. We shall denote by h(Q1 , n, J) the number of
bosonic supermultiplets minus the number of fermionic supermultiplets carrying quantum numbers
(Q1 , n, J). Computation of h(Q1 , n, J) is best done in the weak coupling limit of the first description
of the system where the quantum numbers n and J can arise from three different sources [6]: the
excitations of the Kaluza-Klein monopole carrying certain amount of momentum −l0′ /N along S 1 ,25
the overall motion of the D1-D5 system in the background of the Kaluza-Klein monopole carrying
certain amount of momentum −l0 /N along S 1 and j0 along Se1 and the motion of the Q1 D1-branes
in the plane of the D5-brane carrying total momentum −L/N along S 1 and J ′ along Se1 . Thus we
have
                                     l0′ + l0 + L = n,      j0 + J ′ = J .                             (5.2.1)
  25
    A Kaluza-Klein monopole associated with the compactification circle Se1 cannot carry any momentum along Se1
since the solution is invariant under translation along Se1 [155].




                                                      87
Let
                                            X
                          f (e
                             ρ, σ
                                e, e
                                   v) =              (−1)J+1 h(Q1 , n, J)e2πi(eρn+eσQ1 /N +evJ) ,            (5.2.2)
                                           Q1 ,n,J

denote the partition function of the system. Then in the weak coupling limit we can ignore the
interaction between the three different sets of degrees of freedom described above, and f (e             ρ, σ
                                                                                                            e, e
                                                                                                               v) is
obtained as a product of three separate partition functions:26
                                                                                              !
                              1     X             ′                                        ′
             f (e
                ρ, σ  v) = −
                   e, e                      (−1)J dD1 (Q1 , L, J ′ )e2πi(eσ Q1 /N +eρL+evJ )
                             64
                                   Q1 ,L,J ′
                                                                        !                           
                             X                                               X                   ′
                                 (−1)j0 dCM (l0 , j0 )e2πil0 ρe+2πij0 ev         dKK (l0′ )e2πil0 ρe ,    (5.2.3)
                                  l0 ,j0                                             l0′


where dD1 (Q1 , L, J ′ ) is the degeneracy of Q1 D1-branes moving in the plane of the D5-brane carrying
momenta (−L/N, J ′ ) along (S 1 , Se1 ), dCM (l0 , j0 ) is the degeneracy associated with the overall motion
of the D1-D5 system in the background of the Kaluza-Klein monopole carrying momenta (−l0 /N, j0 )
along (S 1 , Se1 ) and dKK (l0′ ) denotes the degeneracy associated with the excitations of a Kaluza-Klein
monopole carrying momentum −l0′ /N along S 1 . The factor of 1/64 in (5.2.3) accounts for the
fact that a single quarter BPS supermultiplet has 64 states. In each of these sectors we count the
degeneracy weighted by (−1)F with F denoting space-time fermion number of the state, except for
the parts obtained by quantizing the fermion zero-modes associated with the broken supersymmetry
generators. Since a Kaluza-Klein monopole in type IIB string theory on M × Se1 × S 1 / ZZN breaks
8 of the 16 supersymmetries, quantization of the fermion zero modes associated with the broken
supersymmetry generators give rise to a 28/2 = 16-fold degeneracy with equal number of bosonic
and fermionic states. This appears as a factor in dKK (l0′ ). Furthermore since a D1-D5 system in the
background of such a Kaluza-Klein monopole breaks 4 of the 8 remaining supersymmetry generators,
we get, from the associated fermion zero modes, a 24/2 = 4-fold degeneracy appearing as a factor in
dCM (l0 , j0 ), with equal number of fermionic and bosonic states. This factor of 16 × 4 cancel the 1/64
factor in (5.2.3). After separating out this factor, we count the contribution to the degeneracy from
the rest of the degrees of freedom weighted by a factor of (−1)F .
   We shall now compute each of the three pieces, dKK (l0′ ), dCM (l0 , j0 ) and dD1 (Q1 , L, J ′ ) separately.
Before we go on however, we shall fix some conventions. The world-volume of the Kaluza-Klein
  26
    Even though the mutual interaction between these three systems vanish, the individual systems may be interacting.
In particular we shall see that the dynamics of the D1-D5 system in the Kaluza-Klein monopole background has a
strongly interacting component that is responsible for binding the D1-D5 system to the Kaluza-Klein monopole.


                                                               88
monopole as well as that of the D5-brane is 5+1 dimensional with the five spatial directions lying
along M×S 1 . By taking the size of M to be much smaller than that of S 1 we can regard these as 1+1
dimensional world-sheet theories, obtained by dimensional reduction of the original 5+1 dimensional
theory on M. We shall follow this viewpoint throughout the rest of this section although we shall
often refer to this as the world-volume theory. In particular left- and right-moving modes on the
world-volume theory will refer respectively to the modes which move to the left- and right along
S 1 . The D1-brane world volume theory is of course naturally 1+1 dimensional. We shall choose a
convention in which the four unbroken supersymmetry generators of the full configuration act on
the right-moving modes in the world-volume theory. This in turn means that the supersymmetry
transformation parameters themselves are represented by left-chiral spinors since the transformation
laws of the scalars, being proportional to ǭψ, is non-zero only if the supersymmetry transformation
parameter ǫ and the fermion field ψ have opposite chirality. In contrast if a supersymmetry is
spontaneously broken then the associated goldstino fermion field ψ on the world-volume has the
same chirality as the transformation parameter ǫ due to the transformation law δψ ∝ ǫ.

5.2.1   Counting states of the Kaluza-Klein monopole

We consider type IIB string theory in the background M × T N × S 1 where T N denotes Taub-NUT
space described by the metric [156]
                                                        −1
         2        R0      2     2   2   2   2
                                                 2     R0
      ds = 1 +          dr + r (dθ + sin θdφ ) + R0 1 +        (2 dψ + cos θdφ)2               (5.2.4)
                   r                                    r
with the identifications:
                                                 π
               (θ, φ, ψ) ≡ (2π − θ, φ + π, ψ +     ) ≡ (θ, φ + 2π, ψ + π) ≡ (θ, φ, ψ + 2π) .   (5.2.5)
                                                 2
Here R0 is a constant determining the size of the Taub-NUT space. This describes type IIB string
theory compactified on M × Se1 × S 1 in the presence of a Kaluza-Klein monopole, with Se1 identified
with the asymptotic circle of the Taub-NUT space labeled by the coordinate ψ in (5.2.4). The metric
(5.2.4) admits a normalizable self-dual harmonic form ω, given by [157, 158]
                                                                            
                        r              R0                             1
                 ω∝         dσ3 +              dr ∧ σ3 , σ3 ≡ dψ + cos θdφ .                   (5.2.6)
                     r + R0         (r + R0 )2                        2
   We now take an orbifold of the theory by a ZZN group generated by the transformation g. Our
goal is to compute the degeneracy of the half-BPS states of the Kaluza-Klein monopole carrying
momentum −l0′ /N along S 1 . For M = K3, the world-volume supersymmetry on the Kaluza-Klein

                                                    89
monopole will be chiral since the supersymmetry generators of type IIB string theory on K3 are chiral.
According to our convention there will be eight left-chiral supersymmetry transformation parameters,
acting only on the right-moving degrees of freedom. Thus the BPS states of the Kaluza-Klein
monopole will correspond to states in this field theory where the right-moving oscillators are in their
ground state. For M = T 4 the world-volume theory of the Kaluza-Klein monopole will have eight
left-chiral and eight right-chiral supersymmetry transformation parameters. However right-chiral
supersymmetries will be broken once we take the ZZN orbifold, and the unbroken supersymmetries
of the theory will again come from the left-chiral spinors. Since the latter act on the right-moving
modes, the BPS condition will again require that the right-moving oscillators are in their ground
state.
    In order to count these states we proceed as follows:

  1. First we determine the spectrum of massless fields in the world-volume theory of the Kaluza-
     Klein monopole solution described above. In particular we show that the world-volume the-
     ory always contains eight right-moving massless scalar fields and eight right-moving massless
     fermion fields. In addition for M = K3 there are twenty four left-moving massless scalar fields
     whereas for M = T 4 there are eight left-moving massless scalar fields and eight left-moving
     massless fermion fields.

  2. Next we identify the transformation laws of various fields under the orbifold group generator
     ge. We show that all the right-moving fields are e  g invariant, whereas the action of e g on the
     left-moving massless bosonic (fermionic) fields is identical to the action of e
                                                                                   g on the even (odd)
     degree harmonic forms of M.

  3. We now use this information to determine all the g-invariant modes on the Kaluza-Klein
                                                                          g phase e2πik/N must
     monopole. This will essentially require that a field that picks up a e
     carry momentum n − k/N (n, k ∈ ZZ) along S 1 so that the phase obtained due to translation
     along S 1 cancels the e
                           g phase.

  4. Finally we count the number of ways a total momentum −l0′ /N along S 1 can be partitioned into
     these various g-invariant modes, taking into account that part of this momentum comes from
     the momenum of the Kaluza-Klein monopole vacuum without any excitations. This vacuum
     momentum is calculated by mapping the Kaluza-Klein monopole to a fundamental string state
     in a dual description of the theory.



                                                  90
   We begin by analyzing the spectrum of massless fields in the world-volume theory. First of all
there are three non-chiral massless scalar fields associated with oscillations in the three transverse
directions of the Kaluza-Klein monopole solution. There are two additional non-chiral scalar fields
obtained by reducing the two 2-form fields of type IIB string theory along the harmonic 2-form
(5.2.6). Finally, the self-dual four form field of type IIB theory, reduced along the tensor product
of the harmonic 2-form (5.2.6) and a harmonic 2-form on M, can give rise to a chiral scalar field
on the world-volume. The chirality of the scalar field is correlated with whether the corresponding
harmonic 2-form on M is self-dual or anti-self-dual. Since T 4 has three self-dual and three anti-
selfdual harmonic 2-forms and K3 has three self-dual and nineteen anti-selfdual harmonic 2-forms,
we get 3 right-moving and P left-moving scalars where P = 3 for M = T 4 and 19 for M = K3.
Thus we have altogether 8 right-moving massless scalar fields and P + 5 left-moving massless scalar
fields on the world-volume of the Kaluza-Klein monopole.
    Next we turn to the spectrum of massless fermions in this world-volume theory. These typically
arise from the Goldstino fermions associated with broken supersymmetry generators. Since type IIB
string theory on K3 has 16 unbroken supersymmetries27 of which 8 are broken in the presence of the
Taub-NUT space, we have 8 massless goldstino fermion fields on the world-volume of the Kaluza-Klein
monopole. Since according to our convention the eight unbroken supersymmetry transformation
parameters are left-chiral on S 1 , the broken supersymmetry transformation parameters must be
right-chiral. As a result the goldstino fermion fields associated with broken supersymmetries are also
right-moving on the world-volume. On the other hand if we take type IIB on T 4 we have altogether 32
unbroken supercharges of which 16 are broken in the presence of the Taub-NUT space. This produces
16 goldstino fermion fields on the world-volume of the Kaluza-Klein monopole. Since type IIB on T 4
is a non-chiral theory, eight of these fermion fields are right-moving and eight are left-moving.
   To summarize, the world-volume theory describing the dynamics of the Kaluza-Klein monopole
always contains 8 bosonic and 8 fermionic right-moving massless fields. For M = K3 the world-
volume theory has 24 left-moving massles bosonic fields and no left-moving massless fermionic fields
whereas for M = T 4 the world-volume theory has 8 left-moving bosonic and 8 left-moving fermionic
fields. This is consistent with the fact the under the duality transformation that takes us from the
first to the second description of the theory, the Kaluza-Klein monopole associated with Se1 is mapped
  27
    In this section we shall refer to unbroken supersymmetries in various context. Some time it may refer to the
symmetry of the given compactification, and some time it will refer to the symmetry of a given brane configuration.
Also some time it may refer to the number of unbroken supersymmetries before taking the ZZN orbifold and at other
times it may refer to the number of unbroken supersymmetries in the orbifold theory. The reader must carefully
examine the context in which the symmetry is being discussed, since the number of unbroken generators and their
action on various fields depend crucially on this information.

                                                        91
to a fundamental heterotic (type IIA) string wrapped on S 1 for M = K3 (M = T 4 ).
    We shall now determine the eg transformation properties of these modes. For this we note that
irrespective of whether M is T 4 or K3, after taking the ZZN orbifold the unbroken supersymmetries of
the theory are in one to one correspondence with those of type IIB string theory on K3×Se1 ×S 1 . Thus
g commutes with the supersymmetries of type IIB on K3. Half of these e
e                                                                          g invariant supersymmetries
are broken in the presence of Kaluza-Klein monopole and give rise to right-moving goldstino fermions
on the world-volume of the Kaluza-Klein monopole. Thus these fermions must be neutral under ge.
The other half of the e
                      g invariant supersymmetry generators, which remain unbroken in the presence
of the Kaluza-Klein monopole, transform the right-moving fermions into right-moving world-volume
scalars. Thus the eight right-moving scalars must also be invariant under e
                                                                          g . Five of the left-moving
scalars, associated with the 3 transverse degree of freedom and the modes of the 2-form fields along
the harmonic 2-form of T N are also invariant under e g since ge acts trivially on the Taub-NUT space.
The action of e
              g on the other P left-moving scalars, associated with the modes of the 4-form field along
the tensor product of the harmonic 2-form of T N and the P left-handed harmonic 2-forms of M, is
represented by the action of eg on the P left-handed 2-forms on M. This completely determines the
action of e
          g on all the P + 5 left-moving scalars. Now it has been shown in appendix B that e
                                                                                           g leaves
invariant the harmonic 0-form, 4-form and all the three right-handed 2-forms on M. Associating
these five e
           g -invariant harmonic forms with the five e
                                                     g invariant left-moving scalars found above, we
can represent the net action of e
                                g on the (P + 5) left-handed scalar fields by the action of e
                                                                                            g on the
(P + 5) even degree harmonic forms of M.
   What remains is to determine the action of e g on the left-moving fermions. We shall now show
that this can be represented by the action of ge on the harmonic 1- and 3-forms of M. For M = K3
there are no 1- or 3-forms and no left-moving fermions on the world-volume of the Kaluza-Klein
monopole. Hence the result holds trivially. For M = T 4 there are eight left-moving fermions and
eight right-moving fermions associated with the sixteen supersymmetry generators which are broken
in the presence of a Kaluza-Klein monopole in type IIB string theory on T 4 × Se1 × S 1 . Although we
have already argued that the right-moving fermions are e
                                                       g neutral, let us forget this result for a while
and analyze the eg transformation properties of the full set of 16 fermions. Clearly these transform
in the spinor representation of the tangent space SO(4)k group associated with the T 4 direction.
Now eg is an element of this group describing 2π/N rotation in one plane and −2π/N rotation in an
orthogonal plane. Translating this into the spinor representation we see that ge must leave half of the
sixteen fermions invariant, rotate two pairs of fermions by 2π/N and rotate the other two pairs of
fermions by −2π/N. Now we use the information that the right-moving fermions are neutral under


                                                  92
ge. Thus the action of eg on the left-moving fermions is to rotate two pairs of fermions by 2π/N and
 another two pairs of fermions by −2π/N. This is identical to the action of eg on the harmonic 1- and
3-forms of T 4 given in (B.12) and (B.14):

          dz 1 → e2πi/N dz 1 ,   dz 2 → e−2πi/N dz 2 ,
          dz 1 ∧ dz 2 ∧ dz̄ 1 → e−2πi/N dz 1 ∧ dz 2 ∧ dz̄ 1 ,   dz 1 ∧ dz 2 ∧ dz̄ 2 → e2πi/N dz 1 ∧ dz 2 ∧ dz̄ 2 ,
                                                                                                                (5.2.7)

where (z 1 , z 2 ) denote complex coordinates on T 4 .
   Thus the problem of studying the e g transformation properties of the left-moving bosonic and
fermionic degrees of freedom on the world-volume reduces to the problem of finding the action of e
                                                                                                 g
on the even and odd degree harmonic forms of M. Let qs be the difference between the number of
even degree harmonic forms and odd degree harmonic forms, weighted by ges . It has been shown in
appendix B (see the discussion below (B.20)) that qs is equal to Q0,s defined in (5.1.7). Combining
this with the results of our previous analysis we now get

                                                                       gs
                       Q0,s = number of left handed bosons weighted by e
                                                                               gs
                                   −number of left handed fermions weighted by e                                (5.2.8)

on the world-volume of the Kaluza-Klein monopole. Let nl be the number of left-handed bosons
minus fermions carrying ge quantum number e2πil/N . Then we have from (5.2.8), (5.1.7)
                            N −1
                          1 X −2πils/N
                                              N
                                              X −1                           
                                                              (0,s)     (0,s)
                   nl =          e     Q0,s =      e−2πils/N c0 (0) + 2c1 (−1) .                                (5.2.9)
                          N s=0               s=0

Clearly nl is invariant under l → l + N.
   This finishes our analysis of the spectrum of massless fields in the world-volume theory of the
Kaluza-Klein monopole. We now turn to the problem of counting the spectrum of BPS excitations
of the Kaluza-Klein monopole. First of all note that since there are eight right-moving fermions
neutral under e
              g , the zero modes of these fermions are ZZN invariant. These eight fermionic zero
modes may be associated with the eight supersymmetry generators of type IIB on (M × S 1 )/ ZZN
which are broken in the presence of the Kaluza-Klein monopole. Upon quantization this produces a
16-fold degeneracy of states with equal number of bosonic and fermionic states. This is the correct
degeneracy of a single irreducible short multiplet representing half BPS states in type IIB string
theory compactified on M × S 1 / ZZN , and will eventually become part of the 64-fold degeneracy of

                                                          93
a 1/4 BPS supermultiplet once we tensor this state with the state of the D1-D5 system. Thus in
computing the index we are interested in, we must associate weight one with each of the sixteen
states irrespective of whether the state is bosonic or fermionic. Since supersymmetry acts on the
right-moving sector of the world-volume theory, BPS condition requires that all the non-zero mode
right-moving oscillators are in their ground state. Thus the spectrum of BPS states is obtained by
taking the tensor product of the irreducible 16 dimensional supermultiplet with either fermionic or
bosonic excitations involving the left-moving degrees of freedom on the world-volume of the Kaluza-
Klein monopole. We shall denote by dKK (l0′ )/16 the degeneracy of states associated with left-moving
oscillator excitations carrying total momentum −l0′ /N, weighted by (−1)FL . Thus dKK (l0′ ) measures
                                                                           ′
the total degeneracy of half-BPS states weighted by (−1)F where for a given half-BPS supermultiplet
F ′ denotes the fermion number of the middle helicity state of the supermultiplet.
   In order to calculate dKK (l0′ ) we need to count the number of ways the total momentum −l0′ /N
can be distributed among the different ZZN invariant left-moving oscillator excitations. Since a mode
carrying momentum −l/N along S 1 picks up a phase of e−2πil/N under 2π translation along S 1 , it
must pick up a phase of e2πil/N under e
                                      g . Thus the number of left-handed bosonic minus fermionic
modes carrying momentum −l/N along S 1 is equal to the number nl given in eq.(5.2.9). The number
dKK (l0′ )/16 can now be identified as the number of different ways the total momentum −l0′ /N can
be distributed among different oscillators, there being nl oscillators carrying momentum −l/N. This
gives
                               X                                           ∞
                                                                           Y
                                                       ′
                                      dKK (l0′ )e2πieρl0 = 16 e2πiN C ρe         (1 − e2πileρ )−nl .   (5.2.10)
                                l0′                                        l=1

The constant C represents the l0′ /N quantum number of the vacuum of the Kaluza-Klein monopole
when all oscillators are in their ground state. In order to determine C let us consider the second
description of the system where the Kaluza-Klein monopole gets mapped to an elementary heterotic or
type IIA string wound along S 1 , and C represents the contribution to the ground state L0 eigenvalue
from all the left-moving oscillators. If gb denotes the image of e
                                                                 g in this description, then the elementary
string wound once along S 1 is in the sector twisted by gb. Since the modes of the Kaluza-Klein
monopole get mapped to the degrees of freedom of the fundamental heterotic or type IIA string,
there are nl left moving bosonic minus fermionic modes which pick up a phase of e2πil/N under the
          g . Since a bosonic and a fermionic mode twisted by a phase of e2πiϕ for 0 ≤ ϕ ≤ 1 gives a
action of b
                   1
contribution of − 24 + 14 ϕ (1 −ϕ) and 24
                                        1
                                          − 41 ϕ (1 −ϕ) respectively to the ground state L0 eigenvalue,28
 28
      We are counting the contribution from a mode and its complex conjugate separately.



                                                              94
we have
                         N −1        N −1           
                      1 X          1 X       l     l
                C = −         nl +        nl    1−
                      24 l=0       4 l=0     N     N
                           N −1      N −1                N −1      N −1         
                        1 X          X
                                           −2πils/N    1 X         X    l      l
                   = −          Q0,s      e         +         Q0,s          1−     e−2πils/N
                       24N s=0                        4N s=0            N      N
                                      l=0                          l=0
                                                                                                (5.2.11)

where in the last step we have used the expression for nl given in (5.2.9). The sum over l can be
performed separately for s = 0 and s 6= 0, and yields the answer

                                                  C = −e
                                                       α/N ,                                    (5.2.12)

with α
     e defined as in (5.1.8). The left-right level matching condition in the second description guar-
antees that N C and hence α     e must be an integer. Using (5.2.9), (5.2.12) we can rewrite (5.2.10)
as
        X                                  ∞
                                           Y              PN−1 −2πils/N “ (0,s)   (0,s)
                                                                                            ”
                 ′      ρl0′
                     2πie              αρe
                                   −2πie               ρ − s=0 e
                                                   2πile                 c0 (0)+2c1     (−1)
           dKK (l0 )e        = 16 e          (1 − e     )                                     . (5.2.13)
          l0′                               l=1


5.2.2     Counting states associated with the overall motion of the D1-D5 system

We shall now analyze the contribution to the partition function from the overall motion of the D1-D5
system. This has two components, – the center of mass motion of the D1-D5 system along the Taub-
NUT space transverse to the plane of the D5-brane, and the dynamics of the Wilson lines on the
D5-brane along M. The first component is present irrespective of the choice of M but the second
component exits only if M has non-contractible one cycles, ı.e. for M = T 4 .
Dynamics of D1-D5 motion in Taub-NUT space: The contribution from this component is
independent of the choice of M. We shall take M = K3 and analyze the contribution following [6].
The D1-D5-system wrapped on K3 in flat transverse space has four massless scalar fields associated
with the four transverse coordinates and eight massless goldstino fermionic fields associated with
the breaking of eight out of sixteen supersymmetries of type IIB string theory on K3 by the D1-D5
system. Thus when the transverse space is Taub-NUT, we expect the low energy dynamics of this
system to be described by a (1+1) dimensional supersymmetric field theory with four scalar and
eight fermion fields, with the scalar fields taking value in the Taub-NUT target space. Since e
                                                                                              g does
not act on the Taub-NUT space, the scalar fields are e
                                                     g invariant. Furthermore, since e
                                                                                     g commutes


                                                      95
with the supersymmetry generators of type IIB string theory on K3, all the massless fermions, being
                                                              g invariant.29
associated with the broken supersymmetry generators, are also e
    Our goal will be to calculate the spectrum of BPS states in this theory carrying momentum
−l0 /N along S 1 and j0 along the asymptotic circle Se1 of the Taub-NUT space after taking the ZZN
orbifold. This will be done as follows:

   1. We first find the interpretation of the quantum numbers l0 and j0 in this (1+1) dimensional
      supersymmetric field theory and then determine the values of l0 and j0 quantum numbers
       carried by various world-volume fields.

   2. Since a σ-model with Taub-NUT target space is an interacting theory, we cannot carry out the
       counting of states by regarding the world-volume theory as free. We show that the world-volume
       theory actually contains two mutually non-interacting pieces, – a theory of free left-moving
       fermions and an interacting theory of scalars and right-moving fermions.

   3. The contribution to the partition function from the free left-moving fermions is easily computed.
      In computing the contribution from the scalars and the right-moving fermions, we split the
       system into two parts: the zero mode part and the non-zero mode part. By taking the size
       of the Taub-NUT space to be large we argue that the non-zero mode part can be treated
       essentially as a free field theory and we can evaluate the contribution to the partition function
       by simple counting.

   4. The problem of studying the effect of the zero mode part can be mapped to counting of bound
      states in a supersymmetric quantum mechanics describing the motion of a superparticle in
       Taub-NUT space. This problem had been studied earlier in [158, 159]. Using the results of
       these papers we compute the contribution to the partition function from the zero modes.

   5. Finally multiplying the contribution to the partition function from different sources we get the
       net contribution to the partition function from the overall motion of the D1-D5 system in the
       Taub-NUT space.

   6. Note that since all the world-volume fields involved in this analysis are neutral under e
                                                                                              g , the
      orbifold projection will force the momentum of various modes along S 1 to be integers. Other
       than that it plays no role.
  29
    This is consistent with the fact that the unbroken supersymmetry generators – also ge invariant – transform the
scalar fields to fermions and vice versa.


                                                        96
   We begin by identifying the quantum numbers l0 and j0 in the world-volume theory. −l0 /N is,
by definition, the momentum along S 1 . According to the point 6 above, all the modes on the world-
volume carry integer values of l0 /N. Conversely, for every world-volume field all non-negative integer
values of l0 /N are allowed, – the positivity constraint being a consequence of the BPS condition
which allows only left-moving modes carrying negative momentum along S 1 to be excited.
   To identify the quantum number j0 we need to examine closely the metric of the Taub-NUT
space given in (5.2.4), (5.2.5). Close to the origin r = 0 the metric reduces to that of flat space
                                                                          √
 R4 written in terms of Euler angles θ, φ, ψ and the radial coordinate ρ ≡ r, while for large r it is
 R
that of RR3 × Se1 , with Se1 parametrized by the angular coordinate ψ and RR3 parametrized by the
spherical polar coordinates (r, θ, φ). In terms of the coordinates
                                                                            
                     1
                          √         θ          φ          2
                                                               √    θ        φ
                    x = 2 r cos cos ψ +            ,     x = 2 r cos sin ψ +     ,
                                    2          2                    2        2
                                                                            
                     3
                          √        θ           φ          4
                                                               √    θ        φ
                    x = 2 r sin cos ψ −            ,     x = 2 r sin sin ψ −                          (5.2.14)
                                   2           2                    2        2

the metric at the origin r = 0 takes the form of the flat Euclidean metric written in Cartesian
coordinates. As a result it has the usual SO(4) ≡ SU(2)L × SU(2)R rotation symmetry acting on
the xi ’s as:
          1                                                        
           x + ix2    x3 + ix4                  x1 + ix2   x3 + ix4
                                     → UL                                 URT ,   UL , UR ∈ SU(2) .   (5.2.15)
           x3 − ix4   x1 − ix2                  x3 − ix4   x1 − ix2

It is easy to see that only the U(1)L × SU(2)R subgroup of this is a symmetry of the the full metric
(5.2.4). The SU(2)R symmetry generated by the matrix UR acts as the usual rotation group on the
three dimensional space labelled by (r, θ, φ). The U(1)L symmetry generated by diag(eiǫ/2 , e−iǫ/2 )
acts as
                                                       1
                                             ψ → ψ + ǫ,                                       (5.2.16)
                                                       2
with no action on any of the other coordinates. From the point of view of an asymptotic observer this
is just a translation along the compact circle Se1 parametrized by ψ, and the corresponding conserved
charge is the quantum number j0 /2. On the other hand using (5.2.14) we see that near the origin
the ψ translation acts as simultaneous rotation in the 1-2 and 3-4 planes. Thus near the origin the
contribution to the j0 charge can be identified as the sum of the angular momentum in the 1-2 and
3-4 planes [160].
   Since the metric at the origin is the usual four dimensional Euclidean metric, we can describe it in
terms of a set of vierbeins proportional to the identity matrix. The SU(2)L × SU(2)R transformation

                                                           97
described in (5.2.15) will leave the vierbeins invariant only if they are accompanied by a compensating
SU(2)TL ×SU(2)TR rotation in the tangent space. In particular the global U(1)L symmetry (5.2.16) will
induce a tangent space rotation belonging to the U(1)TL ⊂ SU(2)TL group, and the quantum number
j0 can be interpreted as a U(1)TL charge j0 /2. This has a subtle effect on the statistics of various
degrees of freedom carrying j0 charge. From the point of view of an asymptotic observer, the angular
momentum generators are those of SU(2)R and hence the statistics (−1)F of an excitation is equal
to (−1)2J3R . On the other hand the same excitation, viewed from the center of the Kaluza-Klein
monopole will have statistics (−1)2J3L +2J3R = (−1)F (−1)j0 . Since we shall be interested in identifying
the statistics of the states from the point of view of the asymptotic observer, but a large part of the
actual counting of states will be done by analyzing the modes near the center of Taub-NUT, we must
take into account this difference in our analysis.
    Since the massless scalar fields describing transverse oscillations of the D1-D5 system take values
in the Taub-NUT target space, (5.2.16) automatically determines the transformation laws of these
scalar fields under the U(1)L transformation and hence the j0 charges carried by these fields. In
particular at the origin of the Taub-NUT space the scalar fields are in one to one correspondence
with the coordinates xi , and belong to the (2, 2) representation of the SU(2)L × SU(2)R group.
Identifying j0 with 2U(1)L we see that two of these fields carry j0 charge 1 and other two fields carry
j0 charge −1. On the other hand, since the fermions transform in the (1, 2) + (2, 1) representation of
the tangent space SU(2)TL × SU(2)TR group, half of the fermions are neutral under SU(2)TL and hence
also under the global U(1)L . As a result these do not carry any j0 quantum number. The other half
of the fermions are neutral under SU(2)R but transform in the spinor representation of the SU(2)L
group. Thus they carry j0 = ±1.
   The world-volume field theory involving these bosons and fermions will in general be an interacting
field theory since the target space metric (5.2.4) is non-trivial. The bosonic part of the theory is
just that of a σ-model with Taub-NUT as the target space. The coupling of the fermions may be
determined as follows. As discussed in §5.2.1, type IIB string theory on K3×T N has 8 unbroken left-
chiral supersymmetries on the 1+1 dimensional world-volume. These are singlets of the holonomy
group of K3×T N and must also commute with the generator of translation along Se1 . Thus they carry
zero j0 charge. The presence of D1-D5 system breaks 4 of these supersymmetries. The associated
goldstino fermions must be left-moving and carry zero j0 charge. Furthermore, being goldstino
fermions they must be non-interacting in the low energy limit. The four unbroken supersymmetry
generators, which are also j0 neutral and left-moving, would mix the four bosons with four right-
moving fermions carrying the same j0 charge as the bosons. Furthermore since the bosons are


                                                   98
interacting, their superpartner right-moving fermions must also be interacting. Thus we have four
interacting right-moving fermions carrying j0 charges ±1. This correctly accounts for all the eight
fermions and their j0 charges on the D1-D5 world-volume.
   To summarize, the (1+1) dimensional world-volume theory associated with the overall motion of
the D1-D5 system in the Taub-NUT target space is described by a set of four free left-moving U(1)L
invariant fermion fields, together with an interacting theory of four bosons and four right-moving
U(1)L non-invariant fermions. For a D1-D5 system placed at the origin of the Taub-NUT space,
two of the bosons and two of the right-moving fermions carry j0 = 1, and the other two bosons and
right-moving fermions carry j0 = −1. The unbroken supersymmetry transformations leave the free
left-moving fermions untouched but acts on the scalars and the right-moving fermions. All the fields
carry integer momenta along S 1 . The above classification of various fields into fermions and bosons
is from the point of view of a five dimensional observer sitting at the center of Taub-NUT space, –
this is related to the statistics measured from the point of view of the asymptotic four dimensional
observer by a multiplicative factor of (−1)j0 .
    We now turn to the computation of the partition function. Let us first calculate the contribution
to the partition function due to the free left-moving fermions. Since these fermons do not carry any
j0 charge, and carry l0 quantum numbers in units of N, their contribution is given by:
                                                                                ∞
                                                                                Y
                                               F      j0 2πie
             ρ) ≡ Trfree left−moving fermions ((−1) (−1) e
      Zfree (e                                              ρl0 2πie
                                                               e   v j0
                                                                          )=4       (1 − e2πinN ρe)4 ,   (5.2.17)
                                                                                n=1

where F denotes the total contribution to the space-time fermion number, – except from the fermion
zero-modes associated with the broken supersymmetry generators, – from the point of view of an
asymptotic four dimensional observer. The multiplicative factor of 4 comes from the quantization
of the free fermion zero modes. The latter in turn can be interpreted as due to the four broken
supersymmetries of the D1-D5-system on K3 × T N × S 1 .
   Now we turn to the interacting part of the theory. Since we are computing an index we can
assume that it does not change under continuous variation of the moduli parameters. Let us take the
size R0 of the Taub-NUT space to be large so that the metric is almost flat and in a local region of the
Taub-NUT space the world-volume theory of the D1-D5 system is almost free. In this case we should
be able to compute the contribution due to the non-zero mode bosonic and fermonic oscillators by
placing the D1-D5 system at the origin of the Taub-NUT space and treating them as oscillators of
free fields. The contribution from the zero modes however is sensitive to the global geometry of the
Taub-NUT space and should be computed separately.


                                                      99
   Since supersymmetry acts on the right-moving bosons and fermions, in order to get a BPS state
the right-moving bosonic and fermionic oscillators must be in their ground state. Thus as far as
the contribution due to the non-zero mode oscillators are concerned, we only need to examine the
effect of left-moving bosonic oscillators carrying momentum −l0 /N along S 1 and angular momentum
j0 . We have already argued that two of the four bosons carry j0 = 1 and the other two bosons
carry j0 = −1, and that each of these bosons carry arbitrary positive integer values of l0 /N. The
contribution to the partition function from these oscillators can be easily computed [161] and yields
the answer

                      Zosc (e  v) ≡ Troscillators ((−1)F (−1)j0 e2πieρl0 +2πievj0 )
                            ρ, e
                                    Y∞
                                                                1
                                  =                     e
                                                                                         .      (5.2.18)
                                    n=1
                                        (1 − e    2πinN ρ+2πie
                                                             v ) (1 − e2πinN ρe−2πiev )2
                                                                2


In arriving at this equation we have used the fact that since these oscillators are bosonic from the five
dimensional viewpoint, they have statistics (−1)F = (−1)j0 from the four dimensional viewpoint.
   Finally we turn to the contribution Zzero to the partition function from the bosonic and fermionic
zero modes of the interacting part of the theory. Since the intercting theory has four bosonic and
four fermionic fields, the dynamics of zero modes is that of a superparticle with four bosonic and
four fermionic coordinates moving in Taub-NUT space. Under the holonomy group SU(2)TL of the
Taub-NUT space the fermions and hence also their superpartner bosons transform in a pair of spinor
representations. This system is described by an N = 4 supersymmetric quantum mechanics. Thus
in order to look for BPS states of the D1-D5 system we need to look for supersymmetric ground
states of this quantum mechanics.
   So far we have been working at a special point in the moduli space of the CHL string theory where
the circles S 1 and Se1 are orthonormal in the asymptotic geometry. In this case the BPS mass of the
D1-D5-Kaluza-Klein monopole system is equal to the sum of the BPS masses of the D1-D5 system
and the Kaluza-Klein monopole. As a result there is no potential term in the D1-D5 world-volume
action and analysis of bound states is difficult. But this is not a generic situation. As we shall see,
once we switch on a component of the metric that mixes S 1 and Se1 we get a potential that binds
the D1-D5 system to the Kaluza-Klein monopole and the problem is easier to analyze. On the other
hand by taking the potential to be sufficiently mild we can ensure that the analysis of the dynamics
of non-zero modes will not be affected by this modification. Hence Zfree and Zosc should remain
unchanged.
   The mixing between S 1 and Se1 can be achieved by replacing the dψ term in the expression for the
metric given in (5.2.4) by dψ + λdy where y is the coordinate along S 1 and λ is a small deformation

                                                     100
parameter. This clearly remains a solution of the equations of motion but gives an r dependent
contribution to the yy component of the metric:
                                                        −1
                                            2 2       R0
                                  ∆gyy = 4 λ R0 1 +          .                           (5.2.19)
                                                       r
                                                                  √
As a result the tension of the D1-D5 system, being proportional to gyy , acquires an r-dependent
contribution proportional to                                  −1
                                                            R0
                                                λ R02
                                                  2
                                                         1+                                                         (5.2.20)
                                                            r
to first order in λ2 . Supersymmetrization of this term gives rise to other fermionic terms.
    Thus we have to analyze the dynamics of a superparticle with N = 4 supersymmetry moving
in Taub-NUT space under a potential proportional to (5.2.20). This is precisely the problem solved
in [158, 159]. The result of this analysis can be summarized as follows. Depending on the sign of the
deformation parameter λ we have supersymmetric bound states for j0 > 0 or j0 < 0, where j0 is the
momentum conjugate to the coordinate ψ.30 In the weak coupling limit the number of bound states
for a given value of j0 is given by |j0 | and they carry angular momentum (|j0 | − 1)/2.31 Thus for
these states (−1)F = (−1)j0 −1 . If for definiteness we choose the sign of λ such that we get bound
states for positive j0 , then this gives the zero mode partition function
                                                                       ∞
                                                                       X
                                         F       j0 2πie
                                                       v j0
                                                                                                   e2πiev
               v ) ≡ T rzero modes (−1) (−1) e
        Zzero (e                                                  =−           j0 e2πievj0 = −                  .   (5.2.21)
                                                                       j0 =1
                                                                                                 (1 − e2πiev )2

                              v → −e
Since this is invariant under e    v we shall get the same answer if we had chosen to work with
the opposite sign of λ that produces bound states with negative j0 . However in order to extract
the degeneracy of the states from the partition function we have to make a decision as to whether
we should expand the right hand side of (5.2.21) in powers of e2πiev or e−2πiev , and this depends
on the sign of λ. Since in the heterotic description the complex structure modulus of the torus
Se1 × S 1 / ZZN corresponds to the axion-dilaton field, the sign of λ would correspond to the sign of
the asymptotic value of the axion field. A careful analysis shows that for positive sign of the axion
  30
     Since the potential given in (5.2.20) does not depend on the sign of λ, the reader may wonder why the spectrum
depends on the sign of λ. It turns out that other terms in the world-volume action related to (5.2.20) by supersymmetry
do depend on the sign of λ.
  31
     Strictly speaking there is an upper bound on the possible value of |j0 | which goes to ∞ as the type IIB coupling
goes to zero. Put another way, the degeneracy formula given by the partition function (5.2.21) is valid only for type
IIB coupling below a certain value determined by the magnitude of j0 . This bound is related to the existence of the
walls of marginal stability to be discussed in §5.4.



                                                          101
field the degeneracy is given by expanding (5.2.21) in powers of e−2πiev , whereas for negative sign of
the axion field we need to expand (5.2.21) in powers of e2πiev .
   Finally putting all the ingredients together the partition function of states associated with the
centre of mass motion of the D1-D5 system in Taub-NUT space is given by
                   X
                             dtransverse (l0 , j0 )(−1)j0 e2πil0 ρe+2πij0 ve = Zfree(e
                                                                                     ρ)Zosc (e
                                                                                             ρ, e
                                                                                                v )Zzero (e
                                                                                                          v)   (5.2.22)
                    l0 ,j0

                              = −4e−2πiev (1 − e−2πiev )−2
                                ∞
                                Y
                              ×   {(1 − e2πinN ρe)4 (1 − e2πinN ρe+2πiev )−2 (1 − e2πinN ρe−2πiev )−2 }.
                                n=1

The dynamics of Wilson lines along M: Let us now compute the contribution to the partition
function from the dynamics of the Wilson lines along M = T 4 . For this we can ignore the presence
of the Kaluza-Klein monopole and the D1-branes, and consider the dynamics of a D5-brane wrapped
on T 4 × S 1 , – the sole effect of the Kaluza-Klein monopole will be in the identification between the
angular momentum carried by the system from the point of view of a five dimensional observer sitting
at the center of Taub-NUT and the momentum along Se1 from the point of view of an asymptotic four
dimensional observer. Taking the T 4 to have small size we can regard the world-volume theory of the
D5-brane as (1+1) dimensional. This contains eight scalars associated with four Wilson lines and four
transverse coordinates. It also has a total of 16 massless fermions of which eight are left-moving and
eight are right-moving, – these can be regarded as the goldstino fermions associated with 16 broken
supersymmetry generators of type IIB string theory on T 4 in the presence of the D5-brane. The
eight bosons and the sixteen fermions mix under the action of the sixteen unbroken supersymmetry
generators on the D5-brane world-volume. However only eight of these generators commute with
the orbifold group generator e
                             g , – these coincide with the unbroken supersymmetries of a D5-brane
wrapped on K3 and consist of four left-chiral and four right-chiral generators. Under these ge invariant
supersymmetry transformations the scalars associated with the coordinates transverse to the D5-
brane mix with eight of the sixteen fermions on the D5-brane world-volume. The scalars associated
with the Wilson lines mix with the other eight fermions. Since the contribution to the partition
function from the first set of fermions and scalars, – associated with the transverse coordinates
and their superpartners, – have already been taken into account in (5.2.22), we shall focus on the
second set of world-volume fields consisting of the Wilson lines and their superpartners. Since the e
                                                                                                    g
invariant supersymmetry generators are non-chiral, the superpartners of the Wilson line must also
be non-chiral. Thus this set consists of four left-moving and four right-moving fermion fields.


                                                             102
  Our goal is to compute the contribution to the partition function of BPS states from this sector.
We proceed in the following steps:

  1. First we shall determine the e
                                  g transformation properties as well as the l0 and j0 quantum
     numbers of various world-volume fields.

  2. Since the bosonic world-volume fields represent Wilson lines along T 4 , the world-volume the-
     ory is free. Thus once we have determined the quantum numbers carried by various fields,
     computation of the partition function may be done by simple counting.

   We begin by determining the various quantum numbers carried by the world-volume fields. Since
ge represents a 2π/N rotation in one plane of T 4 and −2π/N rotation in an orthogonal plane, e
                                                                                             g acts
as a rotation by 2π/N on one pair of Wilson lines and as a rotation by −2π/N on the other pair.
Thus it must act in the same way on the left- and right-moving fermionic fields related to these
Wilson lines by e
                g invariant supersymmetry transformations. In order to be ZZN invariant, the modes
which pick a phase of e2πi/N under eg must carry momentum along S 1 of the form k − N1 for integer
k, whereas modes which pick a phase of e−2πi/N under eg must carry momentum along S 1 of the form
k + N1 for integer k. As a result, both in the left and the right-moving sector, we have a pair of
bosons and a pair of fermions carrying S 1 momentum of the form k + N1 , and a pair of bosons and a
pair of fermions carrying S 1 momentum of the form k − N1 .
  Eventually when we place this in the background of the Kaluza-Klein monopole, only the left-
moving supersymmetry acting on the right-moving modes remain unbroken. Thus in order to get a
BPS state of the final supersymmetry algebra we must put all the right-moving oscillators in their
ground state and consider only left moving excitations.
   In order to calculate the partition function associated with these modes we also need information
about their j0 quantum numbers. Since the system is eventually placed at the centre of Taub-NUT
space which converts angular momentum at the centre into momentum along Se1 at infinity, j0 is
still given by the sum of angular momenta in the 1-2 and 3-4 planes transverse to the D5-brane
world-volume. Since the scalars represented by the Wilson lines along T 4 are neutral under rotation
in the transverse plane, they do not carry any j0 quantum number. The story however is different
for the fermions. First of all, since type IIB string theory on T 4 is a non-chiral theory, there should
be no correlation between the SU(2)L quantum number j0 and the world-volume chirality of the
massless fermions living on a D5-brane on T 4 . Now from our previous analysis of the D1-D5 system
in the background of K3 × T N we know that the world-volume fermions in this system have the
property that the left-movers have j0 = 0 and the right-movers carry j0 quantum numbers ±1.

                                                  103
Such fermions also exist on a D5-brane on T 4 as partners of the transverse coordinates under e g
invariant supersymmetry transformation, but the contribution to the partition function from these
fermions have already been taken into account in (5.2.22). The rest of the fermions must have
opposite correlation between SU(2)TL quantum numbers and world-volume chirality, ı.e. the right-
movers must have j0 = 0 and the left-movers must carry j0 quantum numbers ±1. Furthermore,
      g has no action on the transverse coordinates, it commutes with SU(2)TL and there should be no
since e
correlation between the ge quantum numbers and the sign of the U(1)L ⊂ SU(2)TL quantum numbers.
                                           g quantum number e2πi/N must have j0 = ±1 and the
Thus the two left-moving fermions carrying e
                                  g quantum number e−2πi/N must have j0 = ±1.
two left-moving fermions carrying e
   To summarize, when we choose M = T 4 instead of K3, the additional left-moving excitations
on the D5-brane world-volume consist of four bosonic and four fermionic modes. Invariance under
the orbifold group generator g requires that two of the four bosonic modes carry momentum along
S 1 of the form k + N1 and the other two carry momentum along S 1 of the form k − N1 , but neither
of them carry any momentum along Se1 . On the other hand two of the left-moving fermionic modes
carry momentum along S 1 of the form k + 1 and ±1 unit of momentum along Se1 , and the other two
                                                      N
left-moving fermionic modes carry momentum along S 1 of the form k − N1 and ±1 unit of momentum
along Se1 . As before the statistics of these oscillators are altered by a factor of (−1)j0 as we come down
from five to four dimensions. Thus if dwilson (l0 , j0 ) denotes the number of bosonic minus fermionic
states associated with these modes carrying total momentum −l0 /N along S 1 and total momentum
j0 along Se1 , then
                    X
                       dwilson (l0 , j0 )(−1)j0 e2πil0 ρe+2πij0 ve
                    l0 ,j0
                       Y                             Y                         Y
                =             (1 − e2πileρ )−2             (1 − e2πileρ )−2            (1 − e2πileρ+2πiev )
                       zz
                    l∈N +1                           zz
                                                 l∈N −1                          zz
                                                                              l∈N +1
                      l>0                          l>0                          l>0
                       Y                               Y                               Y
                              (1 − e2πileρ−2πiev )             (1 − e2πileρ+2πiev )            (1 − e2πileρ−2πiev ) .   (5.2.23)
                         zz
                    l∈N +1                                zz
                                                     l∈N −1                              zz
                                                                                      l∈N −1
                      l>0                              l>0                              l>0


   The partition function associated with the overall dynamics of the D1-D5 system is given by
the product of the contribution (5.2.22) from the dynamics of the transverse modes and (in case
M = T 4 ) the contribution (5.2.23) from the dynamics of the Wilson lines along T 4 . The final result
                                                          (r,s)
can be written in a compact form using the coefficients cb (u) introduced in (5.1.7). In particular
if we use the relations (B.11), (B.16):
                                     2
                         (0,s)           for M = K3             
                       c1 (−1) = N1                                                          (5.2.24)
                                      N
                                        2 − e2πis/N − e−2πis/N    for M = T 4

                                                               104
then the product of (5.2.22) and (for M = T 4 ) (5.2.23) can be written as

             X                                                                         ∞
                                                                                       Y                       PN−1              (0,s)
                                       j0     2πil0 ρe+2πij0 v
                                                             e              −2πie
                                                                                v                                     e−2πils/N c1
                 dCM (l0 , j0 )(−1) e                            = −4 e                      (1 − e2πileρ )2    s=0                      (−1)

             l0 ,j0                                                                    l=1
                  Y∞                          PN−1                               ∞
                                                                                 Y                              PN−1
                                                                  (0,s)                                                              (0,s)
                                                      e−2πils/N c1                                                      e−2πils/N c1
                      (1 − e2πileρ+2πiev )−     s=0                       (−1)
                                                                                       (1 − e2πileρ−2πiev )−      s=0                        (−1)

                l=1                                                              l=0
                                                                                                                                                (5.2.25)

both for M = K3 and M = T 4 .

5.2.3     Counting states associated with the relative motion of the D1-D5 system

Finally we turn to the problem of counting states associated with the motion of the D1-brane in the
plane of the D5-brane. This is a well known system that appears in the original analysis of the five
dimensional black holes in [1] (see [162] for a review of this system). Our analysis will follow the
approach described in [6], which in turn is a generalization of the analysis given in [163, 13] for the
case of type IIB string theory on K3 × S 1 .
    At the special point in the moduli space at which we have been working so far, the D1-D5
system in the absence of the Kaluza-Klein monopole is marginally bound and hence the D1-brane
can move freely in directions transverse to D5. This makes it difficult to analyze this system. We
shall avoid this problem by switching on a small amount of NS-NS sector 2-form field along the D5-
brane world-volume. This binds the D1-brane on to the D5-brane, – the D1-brane being identified
as non-commutative U(1) instanton of the gauge theory on the D5-brane world-volume [164, 165].
Thus the only possible motion of the D1-brane inside the D5-brane is along the directions tangential
to the D5-brane.
    We can now proceed in the following steps:

  1. We first analyze the world-volume theory of a single D1-brane inside a D5-brane. This is given
     by a superconformal field theory with target space M. e  g represents a ZZN symmetry of this
     superconformal field theory. We also identify the momenta along S 1 and Se1 as specific quantum
        numbers in this superconformal field theory.

  2. We then compute of the degeneracy n(w, l, j) of a single D1-brane moving inside the D5-brane,
     wound w times along S 1 / ZZN , and carrying momenta −l/N along S 1 and j along Se1 . The
                                                                                          (r,s)
        result is expressed in terms of the set of coefficients cb                                (u) introduced in (5.1.6).


                                                                     105
   3. Finally we consider the contribution to the partition function from multiple D1-branes moving
      inside the D5-brane and, using straightforward combinatoric analysis, express the result in
         terms of the degeneracies n(w, l, j) of a single D1-brane.

   We begin our analysis with a single D1-brane moving inside a D5-brane. Let σ denote the
coordinate along the length of the D1-brane, σ being normalized so that it coincides with the target
space coordinate in which S 1 / ZZN has period 2π. If the D1-brane winds w times along S 1 / ZZN , then
σ changes by 2πw as we traverse the whole length of the string, regarded as a configuration in the
orbifold. Under σ → σ + 2πw, the physical coordinate of the D1-brane shifts by 2πr along S 1 where

                                               r=w      mod N .                                         (5.2.26)

Identification in M × S 1 under ZZN then requires that under σ → σ + 2πw the location of the
D1-brane along M gets transformed by e  gr = e
                                             gw.
   Since in the weak coupling limit the dynamics of the D1-brane inside a D5-brane is insensitive to
the presence of the Kaluza-Klein monopole, the 2-dimensional theory describing this system has (4,4)
supersymmetry. Thus we expect the low energy dynamics of this D-brane system to be described by a
superconformal field theory (SCFT) with target space M subject to the above boundary condition.
In particular the state must be twisted by ger . Furthermore, since the supersymmetry generators
commute with e g , the supercurrents will satisfy periodic boundary condition under σ → σ+2πw. Thus
the state belongs to the RR sector. Since the D1-brane has coordinate length 2πw, the momentum
along S 1 can be identified as the (L̄0 − L0 )/w eigenvalue of this state. Thus a total momentum −l/N
corresponds to L̄0 − L0 eigenvalue −lw/N. On the other hand the BPS condition on the D1-brane
requires L̄0 to vanish.32 Thus we are looking for a state in the e
                                                                 g r twisted RR sector of this SCFT
with
                                          L0 = lw/N,         L̄0 = 0 .                                  (5.2.27)
       Eqs.(5.2.26), (5.2.27) give interpretation of the quantum numbers w and l in the D1-brane world-
volume theory. What about the quantum number j? This superconformal field theory has an R-
symmetry group SO(4)T = SU(2)TL ×SU(2)TR associated with tangent space rotation along directions
transverse to the D1-brane and the D5-brane. All the bosonic fields in the world-volume theory are
neutral under this group but the fermions transform non-trivially. As discussed in the paragraphs
below (5.2.16), in the presence of the Kaluza-Klein monopole background a translation ǫ along Se1
  32
    Even though the D1-D5 system has supersymmetry acting on both the right- and the left-moving fields, only
the supersymmetries acting on the right-moving fields survive when we place the system in a Kaluza-Klein monopole
background. Thus we only require invariance under the supersymmetries acting on the right-moving fields.

                                                      106
must be accompanied by a rotation 2ǫ in U(1)L ⊂ SU(2)L . Thus if FL denotes twice the U(1)L
generator, then the quantum number j can be identified as the FL eigenvalue of the state [33]. FL
is also referred to as the world-sheet fermion number associated with the left-moving sector of the
(4,4) superconformal field theory.
    Let FR denote twice the U(1)R ⊂ SU(2)R generator, or equivalently, the world-sheet fermion
number associated with the right-moving modes of the (4,4) superconformal field theory. Since
in our system the world-sheet supersymmetry originates from space-time supersymmetry, the total
world-sheet fermion number FL + FR can be interpreted as the space-time fermion number from the
point of view of a five dimensional observer at the center of Taub-NUT space. Taking into account
the fact that the four and five dimensional statistics differ by a factor of (−1)j we see that in four
dimensions, in counting the total number of bosonic minus fermionic states weighted by (−1)j with
a given set of charges, we must calculate the number of states weighted by (−1)FL +FR .
    Finally we must remember that not all the states of the superconformal field theory are allowed
states of the D-brane, – we must pick ZZN invariant states. Since the total momentum along S 1 is
−l/N, under translation by 2π along S 1 this state picks up a phase e−2πil/N . Thus the projection
operator onto ZZN invariant states is given by
                                                        N −1
                                                    1 X −2πisl/N s
                                                          e     g .
                                                                e                                               (5.2.28)
                                                    N s=0

Putting these results together we see that the total number of ZZN invariant bosonic minus fermionic
states weighted by (−1)j of the single D1-brane carrying quantum numbers w, l, j is given by
                       N −1
                   1 X −2πisl/N                                          
      n(w, l, j) ≡       e      T rRR;egr ges (−1)FL +FR δN L0 ,lw δFL ,j ,                     r = w mod N .   (5.2.29)
                   N s=0

Here T rRR;egr denotes trace, in the superconformal σ-model with target space M, over RR sector
                  g r . Insertion of (−1)FR in the trace automatically projects onto L̄0 = 0 states, – so
states twisted by e
we do not need to insert a δL̄0 ,0 factor.
   Let us define [11]
                                                1                                           
                         F (r,s) (τ, z) ≡         T rRR;egr ges (−1)FL +FR e2πiτ L0 e2πiFL z .                  (5.2.30)
                                                N
As shown in (B.6), F (r,s) (τ, z) has power series expansion of the form
                                               1
                                               X        X
                            (r,s)                                     (r,s)
                        F           (τ, z) =                         cb       (4n − j 2 )e2πinτ e2πijz ,        (5.2.31)
                                               b=0 j∈2zz+b,n∈zz/N


                                                               107
                                            (r,s)
for appropriate coefficients cb                     (4n − j 2 ). From (5.2.30), (5.2.31) it now follows that
           1                                            (r,s)
             trRR,egr ges (−1)FL +FR δN L0 ,lw δFL ,j = cb (4lw/N − j 2 ) ,                                          b = j mod 2 .                   (5.2.32)
           N
Hence (5.2.29) gives
                            N
                            X −1
                                                    (r,s)
         n(w, l, j) =              e−2πisl/N cb             (4lw/N − j 2 ) ,              r = w mod N,                 b = j mod 2 .                 (5.2.33)
                             s=0

   Using this result for single D1-brane spectrum, we can now evaluate the degeneracy of multiple
D1-branes moving inside the D5-brane. Let dD1 (W, L, J ′ ) denote the total number of bosonic minus
                                                                                      ′
fermionic states of this system, weighted by (−1)J and carrying total D1-brane charge W , total
momentum −L/N along S 1 and total momentum J ′ along Se1 . This represents the number of ways
we can distribute the quantum numbers W , L and J ′ into individual D1-branes carrying quantum
number (wi , li , ji ) subject to the constraint
            X                          X                           X
   W =             wi ,       L=            li ,            J′ =        ji ,         wi , li , ji ∈ ZZ,              wi ≥ 1,           li ≥ 0 .      (5.2.34)
              i                         i                          i

A straightforward combinatoric analysis shows that
         X                                    ′                            ′
                                                                                      Y                                        −n(w,l,j)
                  dD1 (W, L, J ′ )(−1)J e2πi(eσW/N +eρL+evJ ) =                                 1 − e2πi(eσ w/N +eρl+evj)                    .       (5.2.35)
        W,L,J ′                                                                   w,l,j∈  zz
                                                                                  w>0,l≥0


Using (5.2.33) and defining k ′ = w/N, we can express (5.2.35) as
                            X                                      ′                             ′
                                     dD1 (W, L, J ′ )(−1)J e2πi(eσW/N +eρL+evJ )
                           W,L,J ′
                           N
                           Y    1
                             −1 Y                   Y                                    − PN−1
                                                                                              s=0 e
                                                                                                    −2πisl/N c(r,s) (4lk ′ −j 2 )
                                                                                                              b
                                                                           σ k ′ +e
                                                                       2πi(e      ρl+e
                                                                                     v j)
                     =                                              1−e                                                           .                  (5.2.36)
                                           r ,l∈zz,j∈2zz+b
                           r=0 b=0 k′ ∈zz+ N
                                               k′ >0,l≥0



5.2.4      The full partition function

Using (5.2.3), (5.2.13), (5.2.25) and (5.2.36) we now get the full partition function:
                                        1 N
                                        Y Y −1                     Y                                              − PN−1
                                                                                                                       s=0 e
                                                                                                                             −2πisl/N c(r,s) (4lk ′ −j 2 )
                                                                                                                                       b
                               αρe+e
                          −2πi(e   v)                                                              σ k ′ +e
                                                                                               2πi(e      ρl+e
                                                                                                             vj)
   f (e
      ρ, σ
         e, e
            v) = e                                                                    1−e                                                                    .
                                        b=0 r=0       k′ ∈   zz    zz      zz
                                                             + r ,l∈ ,j∈2 +b
                                                               N
                                                        k′ ,l≥0,j<0 for k′ =l=0

                                                                                                                                                     (5.2.37)

                                                                               108
The multiplicative factor e−2πi(eαρe+ev) as well as the k ′ = 0 term in this expression comes from the
terms involving dCM (l0 , j0 ) and dKK (l0′ ). Comparing the right hand side of this equation with the
expression for the function Φ(ee ρ, σ
                                    e, e
                                       v ) given in (5.1.5) we can rewrite (5.2.37) as
                                                               e2πieγ σe
                                             f (e
                                                ρ, σ
                                                   e, e
                                                      v) =                 .                              (5.2.38)
                                                             e ρ, σ
                                                             Φ(e  e, e
                                                                     v)
According to (5.2.2) we can identify (−1)J+1 h(Q1 , n, J), – the number of bosonic minus fermionic
quarter BPS supermultiplets weighted by (−1)J+1 , carrying Q1 units of D1-brane winding charge
along S 1 , −n/N units of momentum along S 1 and J units of momentum along Se1 , – as the coefficients
of the expansion of f (e  ρ, σ  v ) in powers of e2πieρ , e2πieσ and e2πiev . Except for the overall multiplicative
                             e, e
factor of e−2πieαρe in (5.2.37), this expansion involves positive powers of e2πieρ and e2πieσ . Furthermore,
except for the k ′ = l = 0 term, the power of e2πiev for any given power of e2πieρ and e2πieσ is bounded
both from above and below. For the k ′ = l = 0 term we need to carry out the expansion in positive
or negative powers of e2πiev depending on the sign of the angle between S 1 and Se1 . If the expansion
is in positive powers of e−2πiev , – as in the case of positive value of the axion field, – we can extract
the Fourier coefficient h(Q1 , n, J) from the equation:
                                       Z
                               J+1 1                                                   1
          h(Q1 , n, J) = (−1)            de
                                          ρ de  v e−2πi(eρn+eσ(Q1 −eγ N )/N +ev J)
                                             σ de                                              ,          (5.2.39)
                                    N C                                            e ρ, σ
                                                                                   Φ(e  e, ve)
where C is a three real dimensional subspace of the three complex dimensional space labelled by
(e
 ρ, σ
    e, e
       v), given by

                                       ρe2 = M1 ,    σ
                                                     e2 = M2 ,        v2 = −M3 ,
                                                                      e
                                0 ≤ ρe1 ≤ 1,     0≤σ
                                                   e1 ≤ N,           0≤e
                                                                       v1 ≤ 1 .                           (5.2.40)

M1 , M2 and M3 are large but fixed positive numbers with M3 << M1 , M2 . The choice of the
Mi ’s is determined from the requirement that the Fourier expansion is convergent in the region of
integration. On the other hand if the k ′ = l = 0 term in f (e
                                                             ρ, σ
                                                                e, e
                                                                   v) is to be expanded in positive
powers of e2πiev , – as in the case of negative value of the axion field, – then h(Q1 , n, J) is given by an
expression similar to (5.2.39), except that ve2 is now set equal to a positive number M3 instead of a
negative number −M3 .
                                                   ~ P~ ), using (5.1.2), and noting that β, being equal
   Identifying h(Q1 , n, J) with the degeneracy d(Q,
to χ(M)/24, is equal to γeN given in (5.1.8), we can rewrite (5.2.39) as
                                         Z
                 ~   ~          Q·P +1 1                       2    2                 1
               d(Q, P ) = (−1)              de
                                             ρ de  v e−πi(N ρeQ +eσP /N +2evQ·P )
                                                σ de                                         .   (5.2.41)
                                       N C                                        e ρ, σ
                                                                                  Φ(e  e, e
                                                                                          v)

                                                        109
                                          e ρ, σ
Various useful properties of the function Φ(e  e, e                          b σ, v) have been dis-
                                                  v ) and a related function Φ(ρ,
cussed in appendices C and D.

5.3    Additional charges from collective modes
The analysis so far has been carried out for a restricted class of charge vectors. We shall now extend
our result to a more general class of charge vectors by considering collective excitations of the system
analyzed above. Our analysis will follow [151]. For simplicity we shall restrict our analysis to type II
string theory compactified on K3 × Se1 × S 1 or equivalently heterotic string theory on T 4 × Sb1 × S 1 .
Generalizing this to the case of N = 4 supersymmetric orbifolds of this theory will require setting
some of the charges, which are not invariant under the orbifold group, to zero. The analysis for
N = 4 supersymmetric ZZN orbifolds of type II string theory compactified on T 6 can also be done
in an identical manner.
   The compactified theory has 28 U(1) gauge fields and hence a given state is characterized by 28
                                                 ~ and P~ as defined in §3.1.1. We shall choose a
dimensional electric and magnetic charge vectors Q
basis in which the matrix L has the form
                                                              
                                            b
                                            L
                                                0 1            
                                                               
                                     L=
                                                1 0            ,
                                                                                                 (5.3.1)
                                                       02   I2 
                                                        I2   02
      b is a matrix with 3 eigenvalues +1 and 19 eigenvalues −1. The charge vectors will be labelled
where L
as                                                      
                                         Qb                Pb
                                        k1              l1 
                                                        
                                        k2              l2 
                                                        
                                           
                                  Q =  k3  ,      P =       
                                                          l3  .                            (5.3.2)
                                        k4              l4 
                                                        
                                        k5              l5 
                                         k6                 l6
                          ~ and P~ are to be identified with the four dimensional electric and magnetic
The last four elements of Q
charge vectors introduced in (3.1.28):
                                                                
                                k3         n
                                           b             l3         c
                                                                    W
                              k4   n′               l4   W ′ 
                              = ,                   =           
                              k5   w    b           l5   N    b .                        (5.3.3)
                                k6         w′            l6         N′

                                                  110
Thus in the second description of the theory k3 , k4 , −k5 and −k6 label respectively the momenta
along Sb1 , S 1 and fundamental string winding along Sb1 and S 1 . On the other hand −l3 , l4 , l5 and l6
label respectively the number of NS 5-branes wrapped along S 1 × T 4 and Sb1 × T 4 , and Kaluza-Klein
monopole charges associated with Sb1 and S 1 . The rest of the charges label the momentum/winding
or monopole charges associated with the other internal directions. By following the duality chain that
relates the first and second description of the theory and the sign conventions described in appendix A,
the different components of P~ and Q  ~ can be given the following interpretation in the first description
of the theory. k3 represents the D-string winding charge along Se1 , k4 is the momentum along S 1 , k5
is the D5-brane charge along K3 × Se1 , k6 is the number of Kaluza-Klein monopoles associated with
the compact circle Se1 , l3 is the D-string winding charge along S 1 , −l4 is the momentum along Se1 , l5
is the D5-brane charge along K3 × S 1 and l6 is the number of Kaluza-Klein monopoles associated
                                                  ~ (P~ ) represent various other branes of type IIB
with the compact circle S 1 . Other components of Q
string theory wrapped on Se1 (S 1 ) times various cycles of K3. We shall choose a convention in which
the 22-dimensional charge vector Q  b represents 3-branes wrapped along the 22 2-cycles of K3 times
S̃ 1 , k1 represents fundamental type IIB string winding charge along Se1 , k2 represents the number
of NS 5-branes of type IIB wrapped along K3 × Se1 , the 22-dimensional charge vector Pb represents
3-branes wrapped along the 22 2-cycles of K3 times S 1 , l1 represents fundamental type IIB string
winding charge along S 1 and l2 represents the number of NS 5-branes of type IIB wrapped along
                              b represents the intersection matrix of 2-cycles of K3.
K3 × S 1 . In this convention L
   In our new notation the original configuration described in (5.1.1) has charge vectors of the form:
                                                                     
                                 b0                          b
                                                             0
                               0                          0          
                                                                     
                               0                          0          
                                                                     
                        Q=    0 ,
                                            P =  Q1 − Q5 = Q1 − 1  ,
                                                                                              (5.3.4)
                               −n                        −J          
                                                                     
                               0                       Q5 = 1        
                                 −1                          0
with
                            Q2 = 2n,       P 2 = 2(Q1 − 1),      Q·P =J.                           (5.3.5)
Note that we have set N = 1. The degeneracy of this system calculated in §5.2.4 may be written as:
                                                                      
                         ~ P~ ) = h(Q1 , n, J) = h   1  2    1 2
                       d(Q,                            P + 1, Q , Q · P ,                  (5.3.6)
                                                     2       2
where the function h is given in (5.2.39) with the choice M = K3 and N = 1. Our goal will be to
consider charge vectors more general than the ones given in (5.3.4) and check if the degeneracy is still

                                                   111
given by (5.3.6). We shall do this by adding charges to the existing system by exciting appropriate
collective modes of the system. These collective modes come from three sources:

  1. The original configuraion in the type IIB theory contains a Kaluza-Klein monopole associated
     with the circle Se1 . This solution has been given in (5.2.4), with the coordinate ψ labelling
     the coordinate of Se1 , and (r, θ, φ) representing spherical polar coordinates of the non-compact
     space. These coordinates label the geometry of the space ‘transverse’ to the Kaluza-Klein
     monopole. The world-volume of the Kaluza-Klein monopole spans the K3 surface, the circle
     S 1 which we shall label by y, and time t. As in §5.2 we shall take the size of K3 to be small
     compared to that of S 1 and use dimensional reduction on K3 to regard the world-volume as
     two dimensional, spanned by y and t.
     Type IIB string theory compactified on K3 has various 2-form fields, – the original NSNS
     and RR 2-form fields B and C (2) of the ten dimensional type IIB string theory as well as the
     components of the 4-form field C (4) along various 2-cycles of K3. Given any such 2-form field
     CM N , we can introduce a scalar mode φ by considering deformations of the form [155]:

                                              C = φ(y, t) ω ,                                  (5.3.7)

     where ω is the harmonic 2-form of Taub-NUT space introduced in (5.2.6):
                                                                            
                          r            R0                            1
                   ω∝         dσ3 +            dr ∧ σ3 , σ3 ≡ dψ + cos θdφ .                   (5.3.8)
                       r + R0       (r + R0 )2                       2

     If the field strength dC associated with C is self-dual or anti-selfdual in six dimensions trans-
     verse to K3 then the corresponding scalar field φ is chiral in the y − t space; otherwise it
     represents a non-chiral scalar field. The non-zero mode oscillators associated with the left-
     moving components of these scalar fields were used in §5.2.1 for counting the number of BPS
     states of the Kaluza-Klein monopole. Our focus in this section will be on the zero modes
     of these scalar fields. In particular we shall consider configurations which carry momentum
     conjugate to φ or winding number along y of φ, represented by a solution where φ is linear
     in t or y. In the six dimensional language this corresponds to dC ∝ dt ∧ ω or dy ∧ ω. From
     (5.3.8) we see that dC ∝ dt ∧ ω will have a component proportional to r −2 dt ∧ dr ∧ dψ for
     large r, and hence the coefficient of this term represents the charge associated with a string,
     electrically charged under C, wrapped along Se1 . On the other hand dC ∝ dy ∧ ω will have
     a component proportional to sin θ dy ∧ dθ ∧ dφ and the coefficient of this term will represent
     the charge associated with a string, magnetically charged under C, wrapped along Se1 . If the

                                                112
  2-form field C represents the original RR or NSNS 2-form field of type IIB string theory in
  ten dimensions, then the electrically charged string would correspond to a D-string or a fun-
  damental type IIB string and the magnetically charged string would correspond to a D5-brane
  or NS 5-brane wrapped on K3. On the other hand if the 2-form C represents the component
  of the 4-form field along a 2-cycle of K3, then the corresponding string represents a D3-brane
  wrapped on a 2-cycle times Se1 . Recalling the interpretation of the charges Q
                                                                               b and ki appearing
  in (5.3.2) we now see that the momentum and winding modes of φ correspond to the charges
   b k1 , k2 , k3 and k5 . More specifically, after taking into account the sign conventions described
  Q,
  in appendix A, these charges correspond to switching on deformations of the form:

             dB ∝ −k1 dt ∧ ω, dB ∝ k2 dy ∧ ω, dC (2) ∝ −k3 dt ∧ ω,          dC (2) ∝ k5 dy ∧ ω,
                      X
             dC (4) ∝   Qbα (1 + ∗) Ωα ∧ dy ∧ ω ,                                                 (5.3.9)
                       α
                                                                                 R
  where {Ωα } denote a basis of harmonic 2-forms on K3 (1 ≤ α ≤ 22) satisfying K3 Ωα ∧ Ωβ =
  bαβ . Thus in the presence of these deformations we have a more general electric charge vector
  L
  of the form                                        
                                                  Qb
                                                 k1 
                                                     
                                                 k2 
                                                     
                                           Q0 = 
                                                 k 3
                                                      .
                                                                                             (5.3.10)
                                                 −n 
                                                     
                                                 k5 
                                                  −1

  As can be easily seen from (5.3.9), k2 represents NS 5-brane charge wrapped along K3 × Se1 .
  However for weakly coupled type IIB string theory, the presence of this charge could have large
  backreaction on the geometry. We can avoid this by choosing

                                                k2 = 0 .                                      (5.3.11)

  Alternatively by taking the radius of S 1 to be large we could make the Kaluza-Klein monopole
  much heavier than the NS 5-brane wrapped on K3 × Se1 . This will keep the backreaction of
  the NS 5-brane under control. We shall continue to take k2 = 0 for simplicity.

2. The original configuration considered in §5.1 also contains a D5-brane wrapped around K3×S 1 .
   We can switch on flux of gauge field strengths F on the D5-brane world-volume along the


                                               113
     various 2-cycles of K3 that it wraps. The net coupling of the RR gauge fields to the D-brane
     world-volume in the presence of the gauge fields may be expressed as [166]
                              Z                                       
                                    (6)   (4)       1 (2)
                                  C +C ∧F + C ∧ F ∧ F +··· ,                              (5.3.12)
                                                    2

     up to a constant of proportionality. The integral is over the D5-brane world-volume spanned
     by y, t and the coordinates of K3. Via the coupling
                                             Z
                                                C (4) ∧ F ,                               (5.3.13)

     the gauge field configuration will produce the charges of a D3-brane wrapped on a 2-cycle of
     K3 times S 1 , – ı.e. the 22 dimensional magneic charge vector Pb appearing in (5.3.2).
     In order to be compatible with our convention of appendix A that the D5-brane wrapped on
     K3 × S 1 carries negative (dC (6) )(K3)yrt asymptotically, we need to take the integration measure
     in the yt plane in (5.3.12) as dy ∧ dt, ı.e. ǫyt > 0. Using this information one can show that the
     gauge field flux required to produce a specific magnetic charge vector Pb is
                                                    X
                                            F ∝−           Pbα Ωα .                            (5.3.14)
                                                       α


  3. The D1-D5 system can also carry electric flux along S 1 . This will induce the charge of a
     fundamental type IIB string wrapped along S 1 . According to the physical interpretation of
     various charges given earlier, this gives the component l1 of the magnetic charge vector P .
     The net result of switching on both the electric and magnetic flux along the D5-brane world-
     volume is to generate a magnetic charge vector of the form:
                                                          
                                                      Pb
                                                 l1 
                                                          
                                                 0 
                                                          
                                          P0 =  Q  1 − 1 .
                                                                                        (5.3.15)
                                                 −J 
                                                          
                                                 1 
                                                       0

    This however is not the end of the story. So far we have discussed the effect of the various
collective mode excitations on the charge vector to first order in the charges, without taking into
account the effect of the interaction of the deformations produced by the collective modes with the

                                                 114
background fields already present in the system, or the background fields produced by other collective
modes. Taking into account these effects produces further shifts in the charge vector as described
below.
                                                                                           R
  1. As seen from (5.3.12), the D5-brane world-volume theory has a coupling proportional to C (2) ∧
     F ∧ F . Thus in the presence of magnetic flux F the D5-brane wrapped on K3 × S 1 acts as
     a source of the D1-brane charge wrapped on S 1 . The effect is a shift in the magnetic charge
     quantum number l3 that is quadratic in F and hence quadratic in Pb due to (5.3.14). A careful
     calculation, taking into various signs and normalization factors, shows that the net effect of
     this term is to give an additional contribution to l3 of the form:

                                              ∆1 l3 = −Pb2 /2 .                               (5.3.16)

  2. Let C be a 2-form in the six dimensional theory obtained by compactifying type IIB string
     theory on K3 and F = dC be its field strength. As summarized in (5.3.9), switching on various
                                              ~ requires us to switch on F proportional to dt ∧ ω
     components of the electric charge vector Q
     or dy ∧ ω. The presence of such background induces a coupling proportional to
                                        Z p
                                      −      − det gg yt Fymn Ft mn                           (5.3.17)

     with the indices m, n running over the coordinates of the Taub-NUT space. This produces a
     source for g yt , ı.e. momentum along S 1 . The effect of such terms is to shift the component k4
     of the charge vector Q.  ~ A careful calculation shows that the net change in k4 induced due to
     this coupling is given by
                                                          b2 /2 ,
                                          ∆2 k4 = k3 k5 + Q                                   (5.3.18)

     where we have used the fact that k2 has been set to zero. The k3 k5 term comes from taking F
                                                                      b2 /2 term comes from taking
     in (5.3.17) to be the field strength of the RR 2-form field, and Q
     F to be the field strength of the components of the RR 4-form field along various 2-cycles of
     K3. For non-zero k2 there will also be an additive contribution of k1 k2 to the right hand side
     of eq.(5.3.18).

  3. The D5-brane wrapped on K3 × S 1 or the magnetic flux on this brane along any of the 2-cycles
     of K3 produces a magnetic type 2-form field configuration of the form:

                                      F ≡ dC ∝ sin θ dψ ∧ dθ ∧ dφ ,                           (5.3.19)

                                                 115
  where C is any of the RR 2-form fields in six dimensional theory obtained by compactifying
  type IIB string theory on K3. One can verify that the 3-form appearing on the right hand side
  of (5.3.19) is both closed and co-closed in the Taub-NUT background and hence F given in
  (5.3.19) satisfies both Bianchi identity and the linearized equations of motion. The coefficients
  of the term given in (5.3.19) for various 2-form fields C are determined in terms of Pb and the
  D5-brane charge along K3 × S 1 which has been set equal to 1. This together with the term in
  F proportional to dt ∧ ω coming from the collective coordinate excitation of the Kaluza-Klein
  monopole generates a source of the component g ψt of the metric via the coupling proportional
  to                                 Z p
                                   −     − det gg ψt Fψmn Ft mn                        (5.3.20)

  This induces a net momentum along Se1 and gives a contribution to the component l4 of the
  magnetic charge vector P . A careful calculation shows that the net additional contribution to
  l4 due to this coupling is given by
                                                      b · Pb .
                                         ∆3 l4 = k3 + Q                                    (5.3.21)

  In this expression the contribution proportional to k3 comes from taking F in (5.3.20) to be
  the field strength associated with the RR 2-form field of IIB, whereas the term proportional to
  Qb · Pb arises from taking F to be the field strength associated with the components of the RR
  4-form field along various 2-cycles of K3.

4. Eqs.(5.3.15) and (5.3.16) show that we have a net D1-brane charge along S 1 equal to

                                         l3 = Q1 − 1 − Pb 2/2 .                            (5.3.22)

  If we denote by C (2) the 2-form field of the original ten dimensional type IIB string theory,
  then the effect of this charge is to produce a background of the form:

                             dC (2) ∝ (Q1 − 1 − Pb 2 /2) r −2 dr ∧ dt ∧ dy .               (5.3.23)

  Again one can verify explicitly that the right hand side of (5.3.23) is both closed and co-closed
  in the Taub-NUT background. If we superimpose this on the background

                                         dC (2) ∝ k5 dy ∧ ω ,                              (5.3.24)

  coming from the excitation of the collective coordinate of the Kaluza-Klein monopole, then we
  get a source term for g ψt via the coupling proportional to
                                        Z p
                                      −      − det gg ψt Fψry Ft ry                     (5.3.25)

                                               116
      This gives an additional contribution to the charge l4 of the form

                                          ∆4 l4 = k5 (Q1 − 1 − Pb2 /2) .                           (5.3.26)

                                                                                       R
For non-zero k2 there will also be an additional contribution of k2 l1 to l4 from the − g ψt (dB)ψry (dB)t ry
term in the action.
   This finishes our analysis of the possible additional sources produced by the quadratic terms in
the fields. What about higher order terms? It is straightforward to show that the possible effect of
the higher order terms on the shift in the charges will involve one or more powers of the type IIB
string coupling. Since the shift in the charges must be quantized, they cannot depend on continuous
moduli. Thus at least in the weakly coupled type IIB string theory there are no additional corrections
to the charges.
    Combining all the results we see that we have a net electric charge vector Q   ~ and a magnetic
charge vector P~ of the form:
                                                                                 
                 b
                 Q                                             Pb
               k1                                           l1                   
                                                                                 
                0                                            0                   
                                                                                 
     Q=        k          ,            P =          Q    − 1 − Pb /2
                                                                    2               .             (5.3.27)
                 3                                    1                          
        −n + k3 k5 + Q
                      b /2 
                       2                               b · Pb + k5 (Q1 − 1 − Pb /2) 
                                             −J + k + Q                       2
                                                 3                               
               k5                                            1                   
               −1                                               0
This has
                             Q2 = 2n,       P 2 = 2(Q1 − 1),       Q·P =J.                         (5.3.28)

Thus the additional charges do not affect the relationship between the invariants Q2 , P 2 , Q · P and
the original quantum numbers n, Q1 and J.
   Let us now turn to the analysis of the dyon spectrum in the presence of these charges. For this we
recall that in §5.2 the dyon spectrum was computed from three mutually non-interacting parts, – the
dynamics of the Kaluza-Klein monopole, the overall motion of the D1-D5 system in the background
of the Kaluza-Klein monopole and the motion of the D1-branes relative to the D5-brane. The precise
dynamics of the D1-branes relative to the D5-brane is affected by the presence of the gauge field
flux on the D5-brane since it changes the non-commutativity parameter describing the dynamics of
the gauge field on the D5-brane world-volume [165]. As a result the moduli space of D1-branes,
described as non-commutative instantons in this gauge theory [164], gets deformed. However we do
not expect this to change the elliptic genus of the corresponding conformal field theory [163] that

                                                    117
enters the degeneracy formula. With the exception of the zero mode associated with the D1-D5
center of mass motion in the Kaluza-Klein monopole background, the rest of the contribution to the
degeneracy came from the excitations involving non-zero mode oscillators and this is not affected
either by switching on gauge field fluxes on the D5-brane world-volume or the momenta or winding
number of the collective coordinates of the Kaluza-Klein monopole. On the other hand the dynamics
of the D1-D5-brane center of mass motion in the background geometry is also not expected to be
modified in the weakly coupled type IIB string theory since in this limit the additional background
fields due to the additional charges are small compared to the one due to the Kaluza-Klein monopole.
(For this it is important that the additional charges do not involve any other Kaluza-Klein monopole
or NS 5-brane charge.) Thus we expect the degeneracy to be given the same function h(Q1 , n, J)
that appeared in the absence of the additional charges. Using (5.3.28) we can now write
                                                                
                                 ~  ~        1 2       1 2
                              d(Q, P ) = h     P + 1, Q , Q · P .                       (5.3.29)
                                             2         2
This is a generalization of (5.3.6) and shows that for the charge vectors given in (5.3.27), the degen-
         ~ P~ ) depend on the charges only through the combination Q2 , P 2 and Q · P .
eracy d(Q,
   This analysis easily generalizes to ZZN orbifolds of type IIB string theory on K3 × Se1 × S 1 , with
the only change that the quantum number n, instead of being an integer, will be an integer multiple
of 1/N and the charge vectors Q,  ~ P~ are restricted to the ZZN invariant subspace. For ZZN orbifolds
of type IIB on T 4 × Se1 × S 1 there is an additional change, – the (Q1 − 1) factors in (5.3.27), (5.3.28)
are replaced by Q1 .
   It is instructive to focus on the four dimensional subspace of the charge lattice spanned by the last
four elements of Q ~ and P~ . In the second description of the theory these correspond to momenta and
fundamental string winding charges and H- and Kaluza-Klein monopole charges along the circles Sb1
and S 1 . It follows from (5.3.27), generalized to the ZZN orbifold cases so as to allow n to be multiples
of 1/N, that our formula for the degeneracy is valid for a general charge vector of the form
                                    
                    k3                 l3
                   k4               l4 
            Q=         
                   k5  ,     P =       
                                      1 ,       k4 ∈ ZZ/N, ki , li ∈ ZZ otherwise ,             (5.3.30)
                    −1                 0
in this subspace.
    For use in §5.5 we shall now analyze the T-duality orbit of these charge vectors. This is equivalent
to the question: What is the most general charge vector that can be reached from (5.3.30) by a T-
duality transformation acting within this four dimensional subspace? For this recall that T-duality

                                                   118
transformation is the Γ1 (N) × Γ1 (N) subgroup of SO(2, 2; ZZ) matrices described in (3.1.33). Such
matrices, acting on the set (5.3.30), produce charge vectors of the form:33
                                         
                            k3              l3
                           k4            l4 
                    Q=                   
                           k5  , P =  l5  ,
                            k6              l6
           k4 ∈ ZZ/N, k6 ∈ N ZZ − 1, l5 ∈ N ZZ + 1, l6 ∈ N ZZ, ki , li ∈ ZZ otherwise ,
             g.c.d.(Nk3 l4 − Nk4 l3 , k5 l6 − k6 l5 , k3 l5 − k5 l3 + k4 l6 − k6 l4 ) = 1 .                   (5.3.31)

The condition involving the g.c.d. comes from the observation that the left hand side is preserved
under the T-duality transformation34 generated by the matrices (3.1.33) and for the initial charge
vector (5.3.30) the left hand side is 1 since k5 l6 − k6 l5 = 1. Note that quantization law allows k6 to be
an arbitrary integer but a T-duality transformation on the original charge vector can only produce
those k6 which are −1 modulo N. Since in the second description −k6 measures the fundamental
string winding charge w ′ along S 1 and the orbifold group generator involves translation by 2π along
S 1 , requiring k6 to be −1 mod N corresponds to restriction to states whose electric charge vector
lies in the sector twisted by a single power of the orbifold group. Similarly quantization law allows
l5 to be an arbitrary integer but a T-duality transformation of (5.3.30) can only produce charge
vectors for which l5 = 1 modulo N. In the second description this corresponds to requiring the total
Kaluza-Klein monopole charge associated with the Sb1 direction to be 1 modulo N. We shall use the
T-duality invariance of the theory to argue in §5.5 that our results for degeneracy are valid for the
class of charge vectors given in (5.3.31) in the same domain of the moduli space where the original
calculation was performed.
    For orbifolds of type IIB string theory on K3 × Se1 × S 1 the condition l5 ∈ N ZZ + 1 can be
relaxed by considering a more general configuration with arbitrary number Q5 of D5-branes instead
of a single D5-brane, subject to the condition g.c.d.(Q5 , Q1 )=1. The counting of quarter BPS states
for this more general configuration has been carried out in [6] and reproduced in appendix E. Also
in this case the g.c.d. appearing in (5.3.31) is no longer 1 since for the initial charge vector l5 = Q5
and hence k5 l6 − k6 l5 = Q5 . Nevertheless the condition g.c.d.(Q5 , Q1 − Q5 ) = 1, – which translates to
  33
      While we do not know of any further constraint on the charges, we have not proven that (5.3.31) is the complete
set of conditions on the T-duality orbit of (5.3.30). Thus it is possible that the actual T-duality orbit has additional
conditions on ki , li .
   34
      This in turn follows from the fact that under the transformation (3.1.33) the arguments of g.c.d. transform into
linear combinations of each other with integer coefficients. Thus the final g.c.d. must be an integer multiple of the
initial g.c.d.. Applying the inverse of the transformation (3.1.33) on the final variables we can prove that the initial
g.c.d. is an integer multiple of the final g.c.d. Thus the initial and final g.c.d.’s must be equal.

                                                           119
g.c.d.(l3 , l5 ) = 1, – can be used to argue that the charge vectors on the T-duality orbit of the initial
charge vector still satisfy the condition [167]

               g.c.d.{ki lj − kj li , Nk4 ls − Nks l4 , k4 l6 − k6 l4 ;   i, j = 3, 5, 6, s = 3, 5} = 1 .   (5.3.32)

This follows from the fact that the left hand side is invariant under T-duality and that it takes the
value 1 for the initial charge vector. These relaxed constraints are also consistent with the existence
of the extra duality transformation (3.1.34) in these theories. This duality transformation does not
preserve the l5 = 1 modulo N condition, nor does it preserve the g.c.d. apperaing in (5.3.31).
    It may also be possible to relax the l5 ∈ N ZZ + 1 condition and the last condition in (5.3.31)
for orbifolds of type IIB string theory on T 4 × Se1 × S 1 by taking multiple D5-branes as in the case
of K3 × Se1 × S 1 . This would require a careful analysis taking into account the dynamics of Wilson
lines on multiple D5-branes.
    Let us now consider the effect of S-duality transformation on these charge vectors. The action
of this transformation on the charges has been described in (3.1.35), (3.1.36). It follows from this
that an S-duality transformation acting on a charge vector of the form given in (5.3.31) gives us
back another charge vector of the same form. Thus the subset of the charge lattice consisting of
elements of the form (5.3.31) is invariant under both the Γ1 (N) S-duality and Γ1 (N) × Γ1 (N) T-
duality transformations. This is also the case if we relax the l5 ∈ N ZZ + 1 condition and replace the
last condition on (5.3.31) by the condition (5.3.32), – in this case the conditions are also invariant
under the additional ZZ2 T-duality transformation given in (3.1.34).
   Since we have not shown that T-duality orbits of (5.3.30) generate all charge vectors of the form
(5.3.31) (see footnote 33), it will be useful to prove a slightly different result, – namely that the set
of charge vectors in the T-duality orbits of the charges of the form (5.3.30) is closed under S-duality
transformation. For this we need to prove that an arbitrary S-duality transform of any charge vector
in the orbit can be brought to the form (5.3.30) by a T-duality transformation. To see that let us
consider a charge vector obtained from (5.3.30) by left multiplication
                                                                      bya T-duality transformation
                                                                   α β
matrix Ω0 , followed by an arbitrary S-duality transformation              . This produces a charge
                                                                   γ δ
vector:                                                                
                                   αk3 + βl3                    γk3 + δl3
                                 αk4 + βl4                  γk4 + δl4 
                        Q = Ω0  αk5 + β  ,
                                                    P = Ω0  γk5 + δ  .
                                                                                            (5.3.33)
                                     −α                            −γ




                                                        120
It is easy to see that left multiplication by the T-duality transformation matrix
                                                                
                                     γk5 + δ    −γ 0        0
                                  −αk5 − β α 0             0     −1
                                                                Ω ,                                      (5.3.34)
                                       0        0 α αk5 + β  0
                                        0        0 γ γk5 + δ

brings (5.3.33) to the form (5.3.30) with k5 = 0. Thus the set of charge vectors which can be obtained
from charge vectors of the form (5.3.30) by T-duality transformations is closed under an S-duality
transformation.

5.4     Walls of marginal stability
As has been briefly mentioned in §5.1, the degeneracy formula derived here is expected to be valid
within a certain region of the moduli space bounded by codimension one subspaces on which the BPS
state under consideration becomes marginally stable. As we cross this subspace of the moduli space,
the spectrum can change discontinuously. In this section we shall study in some detail the locations
of these walls of marginal stability so that we can identify the region within which our degeneracy
formula will remain valid. Our analysis will follow the one given in [168]. Some related work can be
found in [167, 150, 169, 170].
   Let us consider a state carrying electric charge Q ~ and magnetic charge P~ and examine under
what condition it can decay into a pair of half-BPS states.35 This happens when its mass is equal
to the sum of the masses of a pair of half BPS states whose electric and magnetic charges add up to
~ and P~ respectively. Since for half BPS states the electric and magnetic charges must be parallel,
Q
these pair of states must have charge vectors of the form (aM~ , cM)
                                                                  ~ and (bN
                                                                          ~ , dN)
                                                                               ~ for some constants
                                               ~ N.
a, b, c, d and a pair of r-dimensional vectors M,  ~ We shall normalize M ~,N ~ such that

                                                  ad − bc = 1 .                                             (5.4.1)

                                                 ~ P~ ) gives
Then the requirement that the charges add up to (Q,

                                    ~ = dQ
                                    M    ~ − bP~ ,         ~ = −cQ
                                                           N     ~ + aP~ .                                  (5.4.2)
  35
    There are also subspaces of the asymptotic moduli space where the mass of a quarter BPS state becomes equal
to the sum of the masses of a pair of quarter BPS states, or a quarter BPS state and a half-BPS state or more than
two half or quarter BPS states. However it has been shown in [169,170] that such subspaces are of codimension larger
than one. Hence in going from one generic point in the moduli space to another one can avoid them by going around
them. As a result we do not expect them to affect the dyon spectrum.



                                                       121
Thus the charges of the decay products are given by

                       ~ − abP~ , cdQ
                    (adQ            ~ − cbP~ ) and (−bcQ
                                                       ~ + abP~ , −cdQ
                                                                     ~ + adP~ ) .                   (5.4.3)

Under the scale transformation
                                                                       
                                       a b               a b        λ 0
                                                 →                                                  (5.4.4)
                                       c d               c d        0 λ−1

eqs.(5.4.1) and (5.4.3) remain unchanged. There is also a discrete transformation
                                                           
                                   a b        a b         0 1
                                          →                        ,                                (5.4.5)
                                   c d        c d        −1 0

which leaves
           (5.4.1)
                  unchanged and exchanges the two decay products in (5.4.3). Thus a pair of
            a b
matrices            related by (5.4.4) or (5.4.5) describe identical decay channels.
            c d
    In order that the charge vectors of the decay products given in (5.4.3) satisfy the charge quanti-
zation rules we must ensure that aM  ~ = adQ  ~ − abP~ and bN ~ = −bcQ ~ + abP~ belong to the lattice of
electric charges and that cM~ = cdQ ~ − cbP~ and dN ~ = −cdQ ~ + adP~ belong to the lattice of magnetic
charges. For the charge vectors Q, ~ P~ given in (5.1.1), or more generally (5.3.27) or (5.3.31), this
would require
                                     ad, ab, bc ∈ ZZ,          cd ∈ N ZZ .                          (5.4.6)
The condition cd ∈ N ZZ comes from the requirement that cdQ ~ − cbP~ is an allowed magnetic charge.
                    ~ of the form (5.1.1), a magnetic charge cdQ
In particular for a Q                                          ~ represents, in either description,
a state with Kaluza-Klein monopole charge −cd associated with S 1 . Since this charge is quantized
                                                                                                        
                                                                                                   a b
in units of N, cd must be a multiple of N. We shall denote by A the set of matrices
                                                                                                   c d
subject to the equivalence relations (5.4.4), (5.4.5) and satisfying (5.4.1), (5.4.6). One can show that
using the scaling freedom (5.4.4) one can always choose a, b, c, d to be integers satisfying (5.4.1) [168].
Eq.(5.4.6) then gives further restriction on the integers c and d.
    We shall now determine the wall of marginal stability corresponding to the decay channel given
in (5.4.3). Our starting point will be the formula for the mass m(Q,~ P~ ) of a BPS state carrying
                ~ and magnetic charge P~ [171, 172]
electric charge Q

             ~ P~ )2 =      1
           m(Q,               (Q − τ̄∞ P )T (M∞ + L)(Q − τ∞ P )
                           S∞
                                                                               1/2
                           +2 (QT (M∞ + L)Q)(P T (M∞ + L)P ) − (P T (M∞ + L)Q)2      ,
                                                                                                    (5.4.7)

                                                         122
where τ = a + iS and the subscript ∞ denotes asymptotic values of various fields. This expression is
manifestly invariant under the T- and S-duality transformations described in eqs.(3.1.30)-(3.1.36) in
                                 ~ P~ ) is marginally stable against decay into (adQ
§3.1.3. In order that the state (Q,                                                ~ − abP~ , cdQ
                                                                                                ~ − cbP~ )
        ~ + abP~ , −cdQ
and (−bcQ             ~ + adP~ ), we need

                  ~ P~ ) = m(adQ
                m(Q,           ~ − abP~ , cdQ
                                            ~ − cbP~ ) + m(−bcQ
                                                              ~ + abP~ , −cdQ
                                                                            ~ + adP~ ) .           (5.4.8)

Using (5.4.7), (5.4.8) and some tedious algebra, we arrive at the condition
                                       2             2
                                ad + bc              E           1
                           a∞ −           + S∞ +            = 2 2 (1 + E 2 ) ,                     (5.4.9)
                                  2cd               2cd        4c d
where
                cd(QT (M∞ + L)Q) + ab(P T (M∞ + L)P ) − (ad + bc)(P T (M∞ + L)Q)
        E≡                                                                              .        (5.4.10)
                     [(QT (M∞ + L)Q)(P T (M∞ + L)P ) − (P T (M∞ + L)Q)2 ]1/2
                                                                      ~ P~ , but is independent of τ∞ .
Note that E depends on M∞ , the constants a, b, c, d and the charges Q,
Thus for fixed P~ , Q
                    ~ and M∞ , the wall of marginal stability describes a circle in the (a∞ , S∞ ) plane
with radius
                                                √
                                           R=       1 + E 2 /2|cd| ,                             (5.4.11)

and center at                                                    
                                                 ad + bc     E
                                        C=               ,−            .                         (5.4.12)
                                                   2cd      2cd
This circle intersects the real τ∞ axis at

                                             a/c and b/d .                                       (5.4.13)

   The cases where either c or d vanish require special attention. First consider the case c = 0. In
this case the condition ad − bc = 1 implies that ad = 1, ı.e. either a = d = 1 or a = d = −1. Using
the scaling freedom (5.4.4) we can choose a = d = 1. By taking the c → 0 limit of (5.4.9), (5.4.10)
we see that the wall of marginal stability becomes a straight line in the (a∞ , S∞ ) plane for a fixed
M∞ :
                         b(P T (M∞ + L)P ) − (P T (M∞ + L)Q)
        a∞ −                                                                S∞ − b = 0 .         (5.4.14)
                [(QT (M∞ + L)Q)(P T (M∞ + L)P ) − (P T (M∞ + L)Q)2 ]1/2

The d = 0 case is related to the c = 0 case by the equivalence relation (5.4.5), and hence do not give
rise to new walls of marginal stability.

                                                      123
   In order to get some insight into the geometric structure of the domain bounded by these marginal
stability walls it will be useful to study the possible intersection points of these walls in the upper
half τ∞ plane [168]. By a careful analysis one finds that these walls never intersect in the interior of
the upper half plane. The only possible intersections are on the real axis, at i∞ or in the lower half
plane. Furthermore due to (5.4.13) the intersection points on the real axis are independent of the
charges or the moduli M∞ . Thus a domain bounded by the marginal stability walls has universal
vertices although the precise shape of the walls do depend on the moduli M∞ as well as the charges
 ~ P~ ). This allows us to give a universal classification of domains in terms of their vertices. In fact
(Q,
since the integers a, b, c, d are related to the charges of the decay products on the corresponding wall
via (5.4.3), this universal characterization of a domain corresponds to specifying how the charges of
a decay product are related to the charges of the original system on the different walls bordering a
particular domain. Various other geometric properties of these walls have been discussed in [170].
   This finishes our general analysis of marginal stability walls and domains bounded by them. An
important question that we need to address now is: in which of the many domains in the τ∞ plane
is our degeneracy formula given in (5.1.3), (5.1.4) valid? This question can be answered by recalling
that in the first description we work in the weak coupling limit of type IIB string theory at finite
values of the other moduli. Following the chain of dualities one can translate this to information
about τ∞ and the matrix M∞ in the second description, and work out how this region is situated with
respect to various marginal stability lines in the τ∞ plane. It turns out [168] in this limit a∞ , S∞ are
finite and P T (M∞ + L)P ∼ |QT (M∞ + L)P | << QT (M∞ + L)Q. As a result for cd 6= 0, E defined in
(5.4.10) is large and in the upper half plane the circles (5.4.10) lie close to the real axis. On the other
hand the straight lines (5.4.14) become almost vertical lines passing through the integers b. Thus for
−1 < a∞ < 1 the weak coupling region in the first description gets mapped to one of two domains, –
the right domain R bounded by the lines corresponding to b = 0 and b = 1 in (5.4.14) together with
a set of circle segments at the bottom, and the left domain L bounded by the lines corresponding
to b = −1 and b = 0 in (5.4.14) together with a set of circle segments at the bottom. The marginal
stability wall corresponding to b = 0 corresponds to the wall of marginal stability encountered in
the analysis of the supersymmetric quantum mechanics describing the D1-D5 center of mass motion
in the Kaluza-Klein monopole background. For the right domain R our original formula given in
(5.1.3), (5.1.4) is valid. For the left domain L we need to change
                                                                  the
                                                                      integration contour to the one
                                                                a b
given in (5.1.13). We shall denote by BR the set of matrices           corresponding to the marginal
                                                                c d
stability walls which form the boundary of the region R and by BL the set of matrices describing the
marginal stability walls which form the boundary of the region L. These sets have been determined

                                                   124
explicitly in [168] for various values of N. For example for N = 1 the set BR is given by
                                                               
                                         1 0        1 1         1 0
                             BR :              ,           ,             ,                       (5.4.15)
                                         0 1        0 1         1 1

representing respectively a straight line passing through 0, a straight line passing through 1 and a
circle passing through 0 and 1. Thus the vertices of R are at 0, 1 and ∞. One can show that for
N = 2 the vertices of R are at 0, 1/2, 1 and ∞ and for N = 3 they are at 0, 1/3, 1/2, 2/3 and
∞ [168]. For N ≥ 4 each domain bounded by walls of marginal stability has infinite number of
vertices.
   An interesting question is: how does the degeneracy formula change as we cross other marginal
stability walls? We shall argue in §5.5 that the changes are such that the expression for the degeneracy
in the other domains can also be expressed as an integral of the type (5.1.3), but with an integration
contour that is different from (5.1.4).

5.5    Duality transformation of the degeneracy formula
As noted in §5.1, the degeneracy formula (5.1.3), (5.1.4) has been written in terms of T-duality
invariant combinations Q2 , P 2 and Q · P although we have derived the formula only for a special
class of charge vectors (5.1.1) or more generally (5.3.27). In this section we shall discuss what
information about the degeneracy formula can be extracted using the T- and S-duality symmetries
of the theory.
    We begin by studying the consequences of the T-duality symmetries of the theory. It follows from
                                                                             ~ P~ ) to (Q
(3.1.30), (3.1.31) that if a T-duality transformation takes a charge vector (Q,         ~ ′ , P~ ′) then

                               Q′2 = Q2 ,   P ′2 = P 2,   Q′ · P ′ = Q · P .                       (5.5.1)

However there may be pairs of charge vectors with the same Q2 , P 2 and Q · P which are not related
by a T-duality transformation. Clearly T-duality invariance of the theory cannot give us any relation
between the degeneracies associated with such a pair of charge vectors. In what follows we shall focus
                   ~ ′ , P~ ′ ) which are in the same T-duality orbit of a charge vector (Q,
on charge vectors (Q                                                                      ~ P~ ) for which
we have derived (5.1.3).
   In §5.4 we have denoted by R the domain of the region of the moduli space in which the original
formula                       ~ P~ ) is valid. It is bounded by a set of marginal stability walls labelled
    (5.1.3),
               (5.1.4) for d(Q,
     a b
by          ∈ BR . Let R′ denote the image of R under some particular T-duality map. In this case
     c d


                                                   125
            ~ ′ , P~ ′) in the region R′ to be equal to d(Q,
we expect d(Q                                                  ~ P~ ) given in (5.1.3):
                                                Z
             ~   ′ ~′              Q·P +1 1                           2    2                   1
           d(Q , P ) = (−1)                        de
                                                    ρ de  v e−πi(N ρeQ +eσP /N +2evQ·P )
                                                       σ de                                            ,
                                             N C                                           e ρ, σ
                                                                                          Φ(e   e, e
                                                                                                   v)
                                                 Z
                                   Q′ ·P ′ +1 1                         ′2   ′2          ′  ′       1
                          = (−1)                    de
                                                     ρ de  v e−πi(N ρeQ +eσP 2/N +2ev Q ·P )
                                                        σ de                                                ,   (5.5.2)
                                              N C                                             e
                                                                                              Φ(e ρ, σ
                                                                                                     e, ev)

where C has been defined in (5.1.4). In going from the first to the second line of (5.5.2) we have used
(5.5.1).
    Let us now determine the region R′ . Since under a T-duality transformation M → ΩMΩT , and
since R′ is the image of R under               ′
                                this map, R is bounded by walls of marginal stability described in
                         a b
(5.4.9), (5.4.10) with           ∈ BR and M∞ in (5.4.10) replaced by Ω−1 M∞ (ΩT )−1 . Using (3.1.30)
                         c d
                                       ~ P~ ) by (Q
we see that this effectively replaces (Q,         ~ ′ , P~ ′) in (5.4.10). Thus R′ is the region of the upper
half plane bounded by the circles:
                           2            2                                                  
                    ad + bc            E′        1                                        a b
               a∞ −             + S∞ +        = 2 2 (1 + E ′2 ) ,                                   ∈ BR ,      (5.5.3)
                       2cd             2cd     4c d                                       c d

where
               cd(Q′T (M∞ + L)Q′ ) + ab(P ′T (M∞ + L)P ′ ) − (ad + bc)(P ′T (M∞ + L)Q′ )
        E′ ≡                                                                                             .      (5.5.4)
                      [(Q′T (M∞ + L)Q′ )(P ′T (M∞ + L)P ′ ) − (P ′T (M∞ + L)Q′ )2 ]1/2

In particular R′ has the same vertices a/c and b/d as R. Thus in the universal classification scheme
described in §5.4, R′ and R correspond to the same domains although the precise shape of the
                                                            ~ P~ ) by the new charge vector (Q
domain walls differ for R and R′ due to the replacement of (Q,                                ~ ′ , P~ ′ ).
Since eqs.(5.5.2)-(5.5.4) are valid for any charge vector (Q~ ′ , P~ ′ ) which can be related to the charge
vectors given in (5.3.27) via a T-duality transformation, we conclude that any (Q,       ~ P~ ) which is in the
T-duality orbit of the charge vectors (5.3.27), the degeneracy d(Q,   ~ P~ ) is given by (5.1.3), (5.1.4) in the
domain R. In the four dimensional subspace of charge vectors, consisting of momenta, fundamental
string winding charge, H-monopole charge and Kaluza-Klein monopole charge along the circles Sb1
and S 1 in the second description, the T-duality orbit consists of charge vectors of the type given in
                                                                                                   ~ P~ )
(5.3.31). Thus for these charge vectors, eqs.(5.1.3), (5.1.4) give us the correct expression for d(Q,
in the domain R.
    Next we shall analyze the consequences of S-duality symmetry. We begin with a charge vector
 ~ P~ ) for which (5.1.3), (5.1.4) hold in the domain R, e.g. a charge vector in the T-duality orbit of
(Q,
(5.3.30). An S-duality transformation changes the vector (Q, ~ P~ ) to another vector (Q
                                                                                       ~ ′′ , P~ ′′ ) and τ to

                                                           126
τ ′′ via the formulæ (3.1.35), (3.1.36). Thus if R′′ denotes the image of the region R under the map
(3.1.36), then S-duality invariance implies that inside R′′ the degeneracy d(Q        ~ ′′ , P~ ′′ ) is given by the
same expression (5.1.3) for d(Q,~ P~ ):
                                           Z
                  ~ , P~ ) = (−1)        1                       2    2                  1
                d(Q ′′  ′′        Q·P +1
                                             deρ de  v e−πi(N ρeQ +eσP /N +2evQ·P )
                                                  σ de                                               .        (5.5.5)
                                         N C                                        e
                                                                                    Φ(eρ, σ e, ev)
                                                                                ~ ′′ and P~ ′′ . For this
We would like to express the right hand side of (5.5.5) in terms of the vectors Q
we define                                             
                                 α̃ β̃        δ     γ/N
                                        =                   ∈ Γ1 (N) ,                            (5.5.6)
                                 γ̃ δ̃       βN      α
and                           ′′              2                                              
                        ρe′′      ρe1 + ieρ′′2       α̃                β̃ 2           −2α̃β̃        ρe
                        e′′  ≡  σ
                       σ                 σ2′′  =  γ̃ 2
                                  e1′′ + ie                            δ̃ 2           −2γ̃ δ̃   σe .               (5.5.7)
                        v ′′
                        e         v1′′ + ie
                                  e       v2′′      −α̃γ̃             −β̃ δ̃       (α̃δ̃ + β̃γ̃)   ve
Using (3.1.35), (3.1.36), (5.5.6), (5.5.7) one can easily verify that
                                      2    2                          ′′   ′′2 +e
                                                                                σ′′ P ′′2 /N +2e
                                                                                               v′′ Q′′ ·P ′′ )
                           e−πi(N ρeQ +eσP /N +2evQ·P ) = e−πi(N ρe Q                                            ,    (5.5.8)

and
                                                de
                                                 ρ de
                                                    σ de    ρ′′ de
                                                       v = de    σ ′′ de
                                                                       v ′′ .                                         (5.5.9)
Furthermore, with the help of eq.(C.22) one can show that [8]

                                               e ρ′′ , σ
                                               Φ(e     e′′ , e        e ρ, σ
                                                             v ′′ ) = Φ(e  e, e
                                                                              v) .                                   (5.5.10)

If C ′′ denotes the image of C under the map (5.5.7) then eqs.(5.5.8)-(5.5.10) allow us to express (5.5.5)
as36
                                        Z
                          ′′ ·P ′′ +1 1                                                               1
    d(Q  ~ , P~ ) = (−1)
          ′′   ′′       Q
                                              ρ′′ de
                                             de    σ ′′ de
                                                                       ′′ ′′2 ′′ ′′2     ′′ ′′
                                                         v ′′ e−πi(N ρe Q +eσ P /N +2ev Q ·P )                      . (5.5.11)
                                      N C ′′                                                   e ρ′′ , σ
                                                                                               Φ(e     e′′ , e
                                                                                                             v ′′ )
To find the location of C ′′ we note that under the map (5.5.7) the real parts of ρe, σ
                                                                                      e and e
                                                                                            v mix among
themselves and the imaginary parts of ρe, σ   e and ve mix among themselves. The initial contour C
corresponded to a unit cell of the cubic lattice in the (e
                                                         ρ1 ,e
                                                             σ1 ,e
                                                                 v1 ) space spanned by the basis vectors
(1, 0, 0), (0, N, 0) and (0, 0, 1). The unimodular map (5.5.7) transforms this into a different unit cell
of the same lattice. We can now use the shift symmetries

                        e ρ, σ
                        Φ(e  e, e     e ρ + 1, σ
                                v ) = Φ(e      e, e     e ρ, σ
                                                  v ) = Φ(e  e + N, e     e ρ, σ
                                                                    v ) = Φ(e  e, ve + 1) ,                          (5.5.12)
                                                                      ′′   ′′
  36
    In arriving at (5.5.11) we have used that (−1)Q·P = (−1)Q .P . This follows from the S-duality transformation
laws of the charges and the observation that N Q2 and P 2 are even integers.

                                                              127
which are manifest from (5.1.5), to bring the integration region back to the original unit cell. Thus
C ′′ and C differ only in the values of the imaginary parts of ρe, σ
                                                                   e and ve. Using (5.1.4), (5.5.7) we see
that for the contour C ′′ ,

                                              ρe′′2 = α̃2 M1 + β̃ 2 M2 + 2α̃β̃ M3 ,
                                              e2′′ = γ̃ 2 M1 + δ̃ 2 M2 + 2γ̃ δ̃ M3 ,
                                              σ
                                    v2′′ = −α̃γ̃ M1 − β̃ δ̃ M2 − (α̃δ̃ + β̃γ̃) M3 .                                  (5.5.13)

Thus C ′′ is not identical to C. We could try to deform C ′′ back to C, but in that process we might pick
up contribution from the residues at the poles of 1/Φ(e        e ρ′′ , σ
                                                                       e′′ , ve′′ ). Thus we see that the degeneracy
formula (5.5.11) for d(Q ~ ′′ , P~ ′′ ) is not obtained by simply replacing (Q,     ~ P~ ) by (Q
                                                                                               ~ ′′ , P~ ′′ ) in the expression
      ~ P~ ). The integration contour C also gets deformed to a new contour C ′′ .
for d(Q,
    Let us now analyze the region R′′ of the asymptotic moduli space in which (5.5.11) is valid. This
is obtained by taking the image of the region R under the transformation (3.1.36). To determine
this region we need to first study the images of the curves described in (5.4.9) in the a∞ − S∞ plane.
A straightforward analysis shows that the image of (5.4.9) is described by the curve
                                              2            2
                             a′′ d′′ + b′′ c′′          E ′′         1
                     a∞ −            ′′ ′′
                                                 + S∞ + ′′ ′′    = ′′2 ′′2 (1 + E ′′2 ) ,     (5.5.14)
                                  2c d                 2c d       4c d
where                                      ′′                                   
                                           a      b′′               α β        a b
                                                            =                            ,                           (5.5.15)
                                           c′′    d′′               γ δ        c d
and
               c′′ d′′ (Q′′T (M∞ + L)Q′′ ) + a′′ b′′ (P ′′T (M∞ + L)P ′′ ) − (a′′ d′′ + b′′ c′′ )(P ′′T (M∞ + L)Q′′ )
      E ′′ ≡                                                                                                  .
                           [(Q′′T (M∞ + L)Q′′ )(P ′′T (M∞ + L)P ′′ ) − (P ′′T (M∞ + L)Q′′ )2 ]1/2
                                                                              ′′ ′′                    (5.5.16)
                                                    a b                          a b            ~ P~ ) replaced by
This is identical in form to (5.4.9) with                  replaced by                    and (Q,
                                                     c d                         c′′ d′′                    
 ~ ′′ , P~ ′′). Since the original domain R was bounded by a set of marginal stability walls            a   b
(Q                                                                                                               ∈
                                                                                                        c d
                          ′′
B
R ,′′ the′′        R is
               domain         bounded by the collection of walls described by (5.5.14), (5.5.16) with
  a b                  α β
                  ∈            BR . Since these walls end on vertices a′′ /c′′ 6= a/c and b′′ /d′′ 6= b/d, un-
  c′′ d′′              γ δ
der the universal classification scheme R′′ and R describe different domains. Thus the result of this
analysis may be summarized in the statement that d(Q          ~ ′′ , P~ ′′) inside the domain R′′ is given by the
same integral formula (5.1.3) with (Q,     ~ P~ ) replaced by (Q  ~ ′′ , P~ ′′) and the contour C replaced by the
new contour C ′′ given in (5.5.13).

                                                                128
    Now, as has been argued at the end of §5.3, an S-duality transformation acting on a charge vector
in the T-duality orbit of (5.3.30) gives us back another charge vector in the T-duality orbit of (5.3.30).
Thus (Q ~ ′′ , P~ ′′) is in the T-duality orbit of (5.3.30), and d(Q
                                                                   ~ ′′ , P~ ′′) inside the domain R would have
been given by eqs.(5.1.3), (5.1.4) with (Q,     ~ P~ ) replaced by (Q
                                                                    ~ ′′ , P~ ′′). Thus we now have expressions
      ~ ′′ , P~ ′′ ) in two different domains, – R and R′′ . In both domains the degeneracy is given by an
for d(Q
integral. The integrand in both cases are same, but in one case the integration contour is C while
in the other case it is C ′′ . This shows that as we cross the walls of marginal stability to move from
the domain R to R′′ the expression for d(Q     ~ ′′ , P~ ′′) changes by a modification in the location of the
contour of integration. The precise modification of the contour for a given wall crossing will be given
by (5.5.13). Following this line of argument one finds that for charge vectors in the T-duality orbit
of (5.3.30) the degeneracy formula in different domains bounded by walls of marginal stability are
given by the three dimensional contour integral of the same integrand as in (5.1.3) but with different
choices of the integration contour.
    The jump in the degeneracy across a marginal stability wall can be calculated in terms of residues
of the integrand at the poles we encounter as we deform the relevant contour on one side of the wall
to the relevant contour on the other side of the wall. One finds that if the wall corresponds to the
decay of the original dyon into a pair of half BPS dyons with charges (Q  ~ 1 , P~1 ) and (Q
                                                                                           ~ 2 , P~2 ), and if it
                                                        ~ 0) + (0, P~ ) by an S-duality transformation,
is related to the wall corresponding to the decay into (Q,
then up to a sign that depends on the direction in which we cross the wall, the jump is given by [168]
                         ~ ~     ~ ~        ~ 1 · P~2 − Q
                                                        ~ 2 · P~1 ) dhalf (Q
                                                                           ~ 1 , P~1 ) dhalf (Q
                                                                                              ~ 2 , P~2 ) ,
                     (−1)Q1 ·P2 −Q2 ·P1 +1 (Q                                                                 (5.5.17)

where dhalf (Q~ i , P~i ) denotes the number of bosonic minus fermionic half BPS supermultiplets carrying
         ~ i , P~i ). For (Q
charges (Q                   ~ 1 , P~1 ) = (Q,
                                            ~ 0) and (Q
                                                      ~ 2 , P~2 ) = (0, P
                                                                        ~ ) this result will be proved in eq.(5.7.5).
For the other cases the formula can be obtained by duality transformation of this result as long as
the corresponding marginal stability wall is related to the wall associated with the decay into (Q,  ~ 0)
and (0, P~ ) by an S-duality transformation. For N = 1, 2, 3, ı.e. for heterotic string theory on T 6 and
asymmetric ZZ2 and ZZ3 orbifolds of heterotic or type II string theory on T 6 , this includes all the
walls [168]. The result (5.5.17) is identical to the wall crossing formula proposed in [145] for N = 2
supersymmetric string theories and will be relevant for the analysis in §5.7.
    So far we have used S-duality invariance to determine the locations of the integration contour in
the degeneracy formula in different domains in the moduli space, but have not carried out any test
of S-duality. We shall now describe some tests of S-duality that one could perform.

   1. If there is an S-duality transformation that leaves the set BR invariant, then under such a

                                                             129
      transformation the contour C either should not transform, or should transform to another
      contour that is continuously deformable to C without passing through any poles.

   2. Analysis of §5.2 has shown that inside the left domain L corresponding to the set of matrices BL ,
      the degeneracy is obtained by performing integration over the contour Cb described in (5.1.13).
      Thus if there is an S-duality transformation that maps the set BR to the set BL then such a
      transformation must map the contour C to the contour Cb or another contour deformable to Cb
      without passing through any pole.

In fact for all values of N one can identify a pair of S-duality transformations which map BR to
BL [168]. They are given by
                                                                    
                     α β        1 −1                  α β           1    0
                            =            ≡ g1 ,               =              ≡ g2 .      (5.5.18)
                     γ δ        0 1                   γ δ          −N 1

This in turn implies that g1 g2−1 maps the set BR to itself. One can show that under both transforma-
tions given in (5.5.18) the contour C gets mapped to another contour that is deformable to Cb [168].
This in turn implies that g1 g2−1 takes the contour C to another contour deformable to C. This provides
non-trivial test of S-duality symmetry of the degeneracy formula. For N ≤ 6 all transformations
which map BR to BR may be obtained by taking positive and negative powers of g1 g2−1, and those
which takes BR to BL are obtained by taking positive and negative powers of g1 g2−1 followed by a
single power of g1 (or g2 ) [168]. Thus for these cases our test of S-duality is complete.

5.6    The statistical entropy function
Although (5.1.3) gives an exact formula for the degeneracy of dyons, it is hard to compare this
directly with the results for the black hole entropy derived earlier in §3.1. In this section we shall
describe a systematic procedure for extracting the behaviour of d(Q,~ P~ ) for large charges:

                         Q2 >> 0,        P 2 >> 0,         Q2 P 2 − (Q · P )2 >> 0,                 (5.6.1)

and also explicitly compute the first order corrections to the leading asymptotic formula. Our analysis
will follow the one given in [6]; this in turn is based on the earlier analysis of [9, 18, 10, 173].
    Our starting point will be the general expression for d(Q,   ~ P~ )
                                           Z
                  ~  ~          Q·P +1 1                         2    2                 1
                d(Q, P ) = (−1)               de
                                               ρ de  v e−πi(N ρeQ +eσP /N +2evQ·P )
                                                  σ de                                         ,     (5.6.2)
                                       N                                            e ρ, σ
                                                                                    Φ(e  e, e
                                                                                            v)


                                                     130
with the integration contour chosen according to the domain in which we want to compute the
degeneracy. As we shall discuss at the end of this section, the change in the degeneracy across a wall
of marginal stability is exponentially suppressed compared to the leading term in the limit of large
charges. Thus the asymptotic expansion of the statistical entropy in inverse powers of charges will
be independent of the domain in which we calculate the entropy. For definiteness we shall choose
our asymptotic moduli to lie inside the domain R introduced at the end of §5.4. In this case the
contour of integration in (5.6.2) will be taken along fixed but large positive values M1 and M2 of ρe2
and σe2 , and fixed but large negative value −M3 of e
                                                    v2 , with |M3 | << M1 , M2 . At a typical point on
the contour the exponent in the integrand is quadratic in Q and P with large coefficients governed
by the Mi ’s. However the phase of the integrand oscillates rapidly and so we cannot estimate the
integral from the magnitude of the integrand. We remedy this problem by deforming the integration
contour so as to make the factor in the exponent as small as possible. In particular if we bring the
                                      e defined by
integration contour to a new position C,

                                      ρe2 = η1 ,   σ
                                                   e2 = η2 ,   ve2 = η3 ,                             (5.6.3)

where η1 , η2 are small but fixed positive numbers and η3 is a small positive or negative number, then
the exponential factor in the new integrand is quadratic in the charges with small coefficients. Since
the expected entropy should grow quadratically with charges with finite coefficients, we conclude that
the integral over the contour Ce is exponentially suppressed compared to the leading contribution.
Thus the dominant contribution must come from the residue at the poles through which the contour
passes as we deform it from C to C. e For this reason we shall tentatively neglect the contribution
from Ce and focus on the contribution from the poles, – as long as this contribution to the statistical
entropy grows quadratically with the charges with finite coefficients, our ansatz is self-consistent.
   Let D denote the four dimensional region bounded by C and Ce along which we deform the contour.
For evaluating the contribution to the integral from the residues at the poles we need to locate the
poles of the integrand in (5.6.2) inside the region D. These poles in turn must come from the zeroes
   e ρ, σ
of Φ(e  e, e                                                               e ρ, σ
           v). According to the analysis given in appendix D (eq.(D.19)), Φ(e   e, e
                                                                                   v) has second order
zeroes at

             n2 (e      v 2 ) + je
                 σ ρe − e               e − m1 ρe + m2 = 0,
                                 v + n1 σ
                                                                                              j2  1
             for m1 ∈ N ZZ, n1 ∈ ZZ, j ∈ 2 ZZ + 1, m2 , n2 ∈ ZZ,            m1 n1 + m2 n2 +      = . (5.6.4)
                                                                                              4   4
For fixed integers m1 , m2 , n1 , n2 and j this describes a surface of real codimension two, ı.e. of real
dimension four. Typically this will intersect D in a two dimensional subspace B bounded by the

                                                     131
intersection of Ce − C with (5.6.4), and the contribution to the integral from the pole at (5.6.4) is
obtained by integrating the residue over B. In fact since we expect the integrand to be non-singular
over the original contour C, C should not have any intersection with (5.6.4) representing locations of
the poles of the integrand. Thus the boundary of the two dimensional subspace B is a one dimensional
curve ∂B given by the intersection of Ce with (5.6.4).
   Since B is an open two dimensional space we cannot again use the residue theorem to carry out
the integral over the region B. Neither can we estimate the integral by examining the maximum
value of the integrand inside B since typically the integrand will still have rapid oscillations inside B
and there are large cancellations. We remedy this by using the saddle point method. Keeping the
boundary ∂B fixed we deform the integration region B to a new region B′ inside the subspace (5.6.4)
such that the maximum value of the integrand inside B′ takes the minimum possible value.37 The
location of this maximum is a saddle point, – the integrand decreases as we move away from the
saddle point along B′ and increases as we move away from the saddle point in directions transverse to
B′ . We can now evaluate the leading contribution to the integral as well as power law corrections to it
by systematically expanding the integrand around the saddle point and carrying out the integration.
   In order to carry out this procedure we shall proceed in three steps.

   1. First we shall determine which of the zeroes of Φ e described in (5.6.4) would give dominant
      contribution to the integrand at the saddle point.

   2. Then we shall verify that this particular zero has a non-trivial intersection B with the region D,
         and that this two dimensional surface B can be deformed to another surface B′ passing through
         the saddle point so that the integrand on B′ has maximum magnitude at the saddle point.

   3. Finally we shall evaluate the contribution from the integral using the saddle point method.

       We begin with the first step. Let us define
                               1
  A = n2 ,      B = (n1 , −m1 , j),      y = (e  e, −e
                                              ρ, σ   v ),          C = m2 ,        q = (P 2 /N, NQ2 , Q · P ) ,   (5.6.5)
                               2
and denote by · the SO(2, 1) invariant inner product

                              (x1 , x2 , x3 ) · (y 1 , y 2, y 3) = x1 y 2 + x2 y 1 − 2x3 y 3 .                    (5.6.6)

Then we have
                          y 2 ≡ y · y = 2(e
                                          ρσ v 2 ),
                                           e−e                   B · y = je      e − m1 ρe ,
                                                                          v + n1 σ                                (5.6.7)
  37
    In terms of the original construction such deformations of B amounts to deforming the region D bounded by C
and Ce so that it contains the saddle point of the integrand.

                                                           132
and the first equation of (5.6.4) may be rewritten as
                                         1 2
                                           Ay + B · y + C = 0 .                                  (5.6.8)
                                         2
Picking up residue at the pole forces us to evaluate the exponent in (5.6.2)
                                                          
                            − iπ ρeNQ2 + σ
                                         eP 2 /N + 2e
                                                    vQ · P = −i π q · y ,                        (5.6.9)

                                e labelled by (m,
at (5.6.8). For a given zero of Φ              ~ ~n, j) the location of the saddle point to leading
approximation is now determined by extremizing (5.6.9) with respect to y subject to the condition
(5.6.8). This gives, for n2 6= 0,
                                          q + λ(Ay + B) = 0 ,                                   (5.6.10)

where λ is a lagrange multiplier. (5.6.8) and (5.6.10) now give:
                                   r
                                          q2                1 q     
                           λ=±                  ,     y = −      + B   .                        (5.6.11)
                                     B 2 − 2AC              A λ
Since
                                                                  j2     1
                              B 2 − 2AC = −2(m1 n1 + m2 n2 +         )=−                        (5.6.12)
                                                                  4      2
due to the last equation in (5.6.4), we get
                                                       p
                                              λ = ±i    2q 2                                    (5.6.13)

for q 2 ≡ 2(Q2 P 2 − (Q · P )2 ) > 0. The correct sign in (5.6.13) is determined as follows. First of
all, note that (5.6.4) describes the same surface if we change the signs of mi , ni and j. Using this
freedom we can choose n2 , ı.e. A to be positive. Since Q2 and P 2 are positive, (5.6.5), (5.6.11) shows
that in order for ρe2 and σ
                          e2 to be positive we must have Im λ > 0. Thus we have
                                                     p
                                               λ=i    2q 2 ,                                    (5.6.14)

and at the saddle point the exponential e−iπq·y takes the form:
                                                            “ √            ”
                               −iπ q·y   iπ(q 2 /λ+q·B)/A    π q 2 /2+iπq·B /A
                         E≡e           =e                 =e                   .                (5.6.15)

Since q · B/A is a rational number, the second term only gives a phase. Hence
                                        π
                                          √2       √ 2 2       2
                                |E| = e A q /2 = eπ Q P −(Q·P ) /n2 .                           (5.6.16)


                                                   133
   Eq.(5.6.16) shows that the leading contribution to the integral comes from the saddle point
corresponding to n2 = 1. In this case a ρe → ρe + 1 transformation in (5.6.4), which is a symmetry
   e ρ, σ
of Φ(e     v) due to (5.1.9), induces n1 → n1 + 1, m2 → m2 − m1 . Since n1 ∈ ZZ, we can use this
        e, e
                                                                  e→σ
symmetry to bring the saddle point to n1 = 0. On the other hand a σ   e + N transformation in
eq.(5.6.4) induces m1 → m1 − N, m2 → m2 + n1 N. Since m1 ∈ N ZZ, we can use this transformation
                              v→e
to bring m1 to 0. Finally the e  v + 1 transformation in (5.6.4) induces j → j − 2, m2 → m2 + j − 1.
Since j ∈ 2 ZZ + 1, we can use this transformation to set j = 1. m2 is now determined to be zero
from the last equation in (5.6.4). Thus we have

                                             m1 = m2 = n1 = 0,     n2 = 1,   j = 1.                            (5.6.17)

                          e is at
The corresponding zero of Φ
                                                      ρeσ v 2 + ve = 0 .
                                                        e−e                                                    (5.6.18)
Also eqs.(5.6.5), (5.6.11) give the location of the saddle point to be at
                        P2                                   NQ2                      1        Q·P
  ρe = i        p                        ,       e=i p
                                                 σ                       ,       v=
                                                                                 e      −i p                  .
           2N       Q2 P 2 − (Q · P )2              2 Q2 P 2 − (Q · P )2              2   2 Q P 2 − (Q · P )2
                                                                                             2

                                                                                                        (5.6.19)
Since we have used the freedom of ρe, σe and ve translations to pick this particular pole, we can no longer
choose the range of ρe1 , σ
                          e1 and e
                                 v1 to be (0,1), (0, N) and (0, 1) respectively. Instead we should allow
them to run all the way from −∞ to ∞ and intersection with (5.6.18) will pick up the appropriate
subspace over which the integration needs to be performed.
   Let us now verify that the region D has a non-trivial intersection with (5.6.18). This will be
done by showing that Ce and hence ∂D has a non-trivial intersection with (5.6.18). The equation
determining the intersection of (5.6.3) with (5.6.18) is given by38

         ρe2 = η1 , σ  e2 = η2 , e
                                 v2 = η3 ,
                                                             2                
                     e1 − (2e
                  η1 σ      v1 − 1)η3      η1      2        1      η3          1    1
         ρe1 = −                      ,        σ1 ) + ve1 −
                                              (e                 −2 σ e1 ev1 −     = − (η1 η2 − η32 ) .
                           η2              η2               2      η2          2    4
                                                                                               (5.6.20)

As long as 0 < 4(η1 η2 −η32 ) < 1, this describes an ellipse in the σ
                                                                    e1 -e
                                                                        v1 plane. Thus the two dimensional
surface B will be a surface inside the 4-dimensional subspace (5.6.18), bounded by the curve (5.6.20).
    Finally we need to show that there exists a surface B′ inside (5.6.18) bounded by the same curve
(5.6.20) such that it passes through the saddle point (5.6.19) and the integrand has a global maximum
 38
      I wish to thank Justin David for pointing out an error in eq.(5.6.20) in an earlier version of the manuscript.

                                                             134
at the saddle point. In that case we can deform the surface B to B′ and compute the integral over
B′ by expanding the integrand around the saddle point. We can explicitly construct such a surface
B′ by considering the family of curves C(λ) defined as
                                                                       σ1 − (2e
                                                                 η1 (λ)e       v1 − 1)η3 (λ)
             ρe2 = η1 (λ), σ
                           e2 = η2 (λ), ve2 = η3 (λ),    ρe1 = −                             ,
                                                                           η2 (λ)
                                   2                      
             η1 (λ)      2        1       η3 (λ)           1     1
                    (e
                     σ1 ) + ev1 −      −2        e1 ve1 −
                                                 σ             = − (η1 (λ)η2 (λ) − η3 (λ)2 ) ,
             η2 (λ)               2       η2 (λ)           2     4
                                                                                                 (5.6.21)

where
                                    P2                                     NQ2
                   η1 (λ) = λ  p                   ,       η2 (λ) = λ p                   ,
                             2N Q2 P 2 − (Q · P )2                   2 Q2 P 2 − (Q · P )2
                                    Q·P
                   η3 (λ) = −λ p                   .                                             (5.6.22)
                              2 Q P 2 − (Q · P )2
                                 2


Since (5.6.21) is the same as eq.(5.6.20) with ηi replaced by ηi (λ), the curve (5.6.21) lies on the
surface (5.6.18). Identifying ηi (ǫ) with ηi for some small positive number ǫ, we see that at λ = ǫ the
curve coincides with C.e On the other hand at λ = 1 the curve (5.6.21) shrinks to the saddle point
(5.6.19). Finally, the magnitude of the exponential factor in the integrand, – which depends only on
                                                             p
the imaginary parts of ρe, σe and e  v , – takes value exp(πλ Q2 P 2 − (Q · P )2 ) on the curve (5.6.21).
Thus in the range ǫ ≤ λ ≤ 1 it reaches a maximum at λ = 1, ı.e. at the saddle point (5.6.19). From
this we see that the surface foliated by the family of curves C(λ) for ǫ ≤ λ ≤ 1 has all the right
properties to be identified as the surface B′ .
   We now turn to the evaluation of the contribution to the integral from the residue at (5.6.18).
For this we introduce a new set of variables (ρ, σ, v) related to (e
                                                                   ρ, σ
                                                                      e, e
                                                                         v ) via the relations
                          1     1                    v 2 − ρσ                 v−ρ
                   ρe =                ,     σ
                                             e=N               ,     v=
                                                                     e                ,          (5.6.23)
                          N 2v − ρ − σ              2v − ρ − σ             2v − ρ − σ
or equivalently,
                          e−e
                        ρeσ    v2              v − 1)2
                                          e − (e
                                        ρeσ                               e − ve2 + ve
                                                                        ρeσ
                      ρ=          ,  σ=                ,           v=                  .         (5.6.24)
                           N ρe              N ρe                            N ρe
Under this map (5.6.18) takes the form
                                                  v = 0.                                         (5.6.25)
Now it has been shown in eq.(C.21) that

                                e ρ, σ
                                Φ(e  e, e                           b σ, v)
                                        v) = −(i)k C1 (2v − ρ − σ)k Φ(ρ,                         (5.6.26)

                                                   135
                                         b σ, v) is a new function defined in (C.19):
where C1 is a real positive constant and Φ(ρ,
     b σ, v) = e2πi(bαρ+bγ σ+v)
     Φ(ρ,
               Y1 N Y −1        Y                        n                           oPN−1
                                                                                       s=0 e
                                                                                             −2πisr/N c(0,s) (4k ′ l−j 2 )
                                                                                                       b
                                                             2πir/N 2πi(k ′ σ+lρ+jv)
                                                          1−e      e
                     b=0 r=0           zz     zz
                                 (k′ ,l)∈ ,j∈2 +b
                               k′ ,l≥0,j<0 for k′ =l=0

                                 1
                    α
                    b=b
                      γ=           χ(M) .                                                                              (5.6.27)
                                24
Using (5.6.26) and the identity

                             ρ ∧ de
                            de         v = −(2v − ρ − σ)−3 dρ ∧ dσ ∧ dv ,
                                  σ ∧ de                                                                               (5.6.28)

we can express the contribution to (5.6.2) from the residue at the pole at v = 0 as
                                        −k Z
             ~  ~            Q·P +1 (i)                                        1
          d(Q, P ) ≃ (−1)                    dρ ∧ dσ ∧ dv (2v − ρ − σ)−k−3
                                    N C1 C ′                               b σ, v)
                                                                           Φ(ρ,
                                  2                                                
                                       v − ρσ    2        1       2    2(v − ρ)
                        exp −iπ                 P +             Q +              Q·P
                                     2v − ρ − σ      2v − ρ − σ       2v − ρ − σ
                                                                                                                       (5.6.29)

where C ′ denotes a contour around v = 0. Note that we have used the wedge product notation to
keep track of the orientation of the integration region and have implicitly used the convention that
the original integral over ρe1 , σ                                      ρ ∧ de
                                 e1 and ve1 corresponds to the measure de    σ ∧ de
                                                                                  v.
   We shall evaluate this integral by first performing the v integral using Cauchy’s formula and then
carrying out the ρ and σ integrals by saddle point approximation. According to (C.25) near v = 0
                                 b σ, v) = −4π 2 v 2 g(ρ) g(σ) + O(v 4 ) ,
                                 Φ(ρ,                                                                                  (5.6.30)

where the function g(ρ) has been introduced in (3.1.41). Thus the contribution to (5.6.29) from the
pole at v = 0 is given by
                                  −k Z
         ~ P~ ) ≃ −(−1)       (i)
       d(Q,                 Q·P +1
                                         dρ ∧ dσ ∧ dv v −2 (2v − ρ − σ)−k−3 (g(ρ)g(σ))−1
                            4π 2 NC1 C ′
                          2                                                 
                             v − ρσ     2        1        2    2(v − ρ)
                  exp −iπ             P +               Q +              Q·P     .
                           2v − ρ − σ       2v − ρ − σ        2v − ρ − σ
                                                                                                                       (5.6.31)

Evaluating the v integral in (5.6.31) by Cauchy’s formula, we get
                                              Z
                 ~  ~        (i)−k+1 γ      k   dρ ∧ dσ
              d(Q, P ) ≃               (−1)
                              2πNC1             (ρ + σ)2

                                                              136
                                                                                  
                                                   ρσ          1        ρ−σ
                             −2(k + 3) + 2πi          P2 −         Q2 +     Q·P
                                                 ρ+σ         ρ+σ        ρ+σ
                                                                        
                                           ρσ          1         ρ−σ
                            exp − iπ           P2 −        Q2 +       Q·P
                                         ρ+σ         ρ+σ         ρ+σ
                                                                   
                            − ln g(ρ) − ln g(σ) − (k + 2) ln(ρ + σ) ,                          (5.6.32)

where γ = 1 or −1 depending on whether the e
                                           v (or v) contour encloses the pole anti-clockwise or
clockwise, or equivalently whether the pole from which the dominant contribution comes was above
             v integration contour for the original contour C. It may
or below the e                                                     q be determined as follows. First
                        e at ρeσ
note that the zeroes of Φ      e−e    v = 0 correspond to ve = 1 ± 1 + ρeσ
                                 v2 + e                                  e. For the original contour
                                                                     2      4
C, ρe2 and σ
           e2 are large and hence the poles are located at large positive or negative imaginary values
of e
   v. As we reduce ρe2 and σe2 in the process of deforming the ρe and σ
                                                                      e contours, these poles approach
the e
    v integration contour. We can however avoid them by deforming the ve integration contour with
the ultimate goal that we try to minimize the maximum value of the integrand over the integration
contour. For Q·P > 0 this can be done by deforming the e v contour into the lower half plane since the
exponential factor decreases as we reduce e
                                          v2 . Thus we can always avoid the pole coming down from
above; but at some point we encounter the pole coming up from below and the major contribution
to the integral would come from the residue at this pole. Since this pole was below the original ve
integration contour, the residue from this is calculated by enclosing it in the clockwise direction.
This gives γ = −1. An exactly similar argument shows that for Q · P < 0, the main obstruction
to our ability to reduce the integrand by deforming the e
                                                        v contour comes from the pole above the
original ve contour. This gives γ = 1. Thus we have

                                         γ = −Sign(Q · P ) .                                   (5.6.33)

                                       contribution from other poles for which n2 6= 1, and are
   The correction to (5.6.32) involves √
                                            2   2         2
suppressed by fractional powers of e−π Q P −(Q·P ) . Thus (5.6.32) contains information not only
about the leading contribution to the statistical entropy but also about all the subleading corrections
involving inverse powers of charges.
   Let us now introduce new complex variables τ1 and τ2 through the relations:

                                  ρ = τ1 + iτ2 ,          σ = −τ1 + iτ2 .                      (5.6.34)

Then (5.6.32) may be rewritten as
                                        Z
                    ~ P~ ) ≃      γ         dτ1 ∧ dτ2
                  d(Q,
                                4πNC1          τ22

                                                        137
                                                                                        
                                                π  2
                                   2(k + 3) +       (τ1 + τ22 )P 2 + Q2 − 2τ1 Q · P
                                                τ2
                                      
                                         π  
                                  exp        (τ12 + τ22 )P 2 + Q2 − 2τ1 Q · P
                                        2τ2
                                                                                             
                                  − ln g(τ1 + iτ2 ) − ln g(−τ1 + iτ2 ) − (k + 2) ln(2τ2 ) .       (5.6.35)

The integral in (5.6.35) is carried out over the image of the surface (5.6.21) in the complex τ1 -τ2
coordinate system. In the leading approximation the saddle point, obtained by extremizing
                                 π  2
                                    (τ1 + τ22 )P 2 + Q2 − 2τ1 Q · P                       (5.6.36)
                                2τ2
occurs at
                                                         p
                           τ1 = Q · P/P 2,        τ2 =       Q2 P 2 − (Q · P )2 /P 2 .            (5.6.37)
On the other hand the steepest descent of the integrand occurs as we move away from the saddle
point along the imaginary directions in the τ1 and τ2 plane. Hence the integration contour is such
that it passes through the saddle point (5.6.37) and lies along imaginary τ1 and τ2 direction at the
saddle point. If we now regard τ1 and τ2 as real variables and define

                                               τ = τ1 + iτ2 ,                                     (5.6.38)

then (5.6.35) may be formally reexpressed as
                                     Z                                         
                ~  ~          γ         dτ1 ∧ dτ2                 π           2
              d(Q, P ) ≃                             2(k + 3) + |Q − τ P |
                          4πNC1            τ22                   τ2
                                                                                          i
                                  π
                          exp        |Q − τ P |2 − ln g(τ ) − ln g(−τ̄ ) − (k + 2) ln(2τ2 ) .
                                 2τ2
                                                                                                  (5.6.39)

In evaluating this integral we must first express the integrand in terms of τ1 and τ2 treating them as
real variables, and then carry out the integral by analytically rotating the integration contours along
the imaginary axis both in the complex τ1 and complex τ2 plane.
   In order to determine the overall sign, we need to determine whether dτ1 ∧dτ2 defines a positive or
negative integration measure along the deformed contour at the saddle point. This can be determined
by expressing the original (e
                            ρ, σ
                               e, e
                                  v ) coordinates in terms of the new coordinates (τ1 , τ2 ). Setting v = 0
in (5.6.23) and using (5.6.34) we get
                                   i              τ 2 + τ22                1     τ1
                          ρe =        ,     e = iN 1
                                            σ               ,         v=
                                                                      e      −i     .             (5.6.40)
                                 2Nτ2                2τ2                   2    2τ2

                                                     138
From this we see that
                                                   τ1
                                           ρ ∧ de
                                          de    σ=−    dτ1 ∧ dτ2 .                            (5.6.41)
                                                  2τ23
       ρ ∧ de
Since de    σ represents positive integration measure deρ1 de
                                                            σ1 according to the convention introduced
below (5.6.29), we see that around the saddle point dτ1 ∧ dτ2 describes positive (negative) integration
measure if τ1 is negative (positive), ı.e, Q · P is negative (positive). Combining this with (5.6.33) we
see that (5.6.39) may be expressed as
                                     Z                                      
                 ~ ~          1        dτ1 dτ2                π            2
              d(Q, P ) ≃                         2(k + 3) + |Q − τ P |
                           4πNC1         τ22                  τ2
                                                                                          i
                                  π
                           exp       |Q − τ P |2 − ln g(τ ) − ln g(−τ̄ ) − (k + 2) ln(2τ2 ) ,
                                 2τ2
                                                                                                      (5.6.42)

where dτ1 dτ2 is defined such that it describes a positive integration measure when the integration
contour lies along imaginary τ1 and τ2 direction at the saddle point.
                                      ~ P
                  ~ P~ ) with eSstat (Q, ~)
   Identifying d(Q,                         where Sstat denotes the statistical entropy, we can rewrite
(5.6.42) as                                                   Z
                                                  ~ P
                                           Sstat (Q, ~)           d2 τ −F (~τ )
                                          e               ≃            e        ,                     (5.6.43)
                                                                   τ22
where ~τ = (τ1 , τ2 ) or (τ, τ̄ ) depending on the basis we choose to use, and
                                    
                                       π
                     F (~τ ) = −          |Q − τ P |2 − ln g(τ ) − ln g(−τ̄ ) − (k + 2) ln(2τ2 )
                                      2τ2
                                        n                                 o
                                                            π           2
                                   + ln K0 2(k + 3) + |Q − τ P |               ,
                                                           τ2
                                      1
                       K0 ≡                .                                                          (5.6.44)
                                   4πNC1
                                                     ~ P~ , but we have not explicitly displayed these
Note that F (~τ ) also depends on the charge vectors Q,
in its argument.
    As described in eq.(3.1.44) (and proved in appendix C, eq.(C.34)), g(τ ) transforms as a modular
form of weight (k + 2) under the Γ1 (N) group. Using this fact, and (5.6.44), one can show that in
(5.6.43) the integration measure d2 τ /(τ2 )2 as well as the integrand e−F (~τ ) are manifestly invariant
under the Γ1 (N) transformation:

                    ~ → αQ
                         ~ + β P~ ,                                      ατ + β
                    Q                    P~ → γ Q
                                                ~ + δ P~ ,         τ→           ,
                                                                         γτ + δ
                      α, β, γ, δ ∈ ZZ,    αδ − βγ = 1,             α, δ = 1 mod N ,   γ = 0 mod N .   (5.6.45)

                                                          139
            ~ P~ ) computed from (5.6.43) is invariant under Γ1 (N). From (3.1.36) one can see that
Thus Sstat (Q,
this corresponds to the S-duality symmetry of the theory in the second description.
    We shall now describe a systematic procedure for evaluating Sstat given in (5.6.43) as an expansion
in inverse powers of the charges. For this we introduce the generating function:
                                              Z 2
                                         ~
                                      W (J)      d τ −F (~τ )+J·~
                                                              ~τ
                                     e      =         e           ,                             (5.6.46)
                                                  τ22
                             ~ and define Γ(~u) as the Legendre transform of W (J):
for a two dimensional vector J,                                                 ~

                                                                                ~
                                                                           ∂W (J)
                                 Γ(~u) = J~ · ~u − W (J)
                                                      ~ ,           ui =          .             (5.6.47)
                                                                            ∂Ji
It follows from (5.6.47) that
                                                         ∂Γ(~u)
                                                  Ji =          .                               (5.6.48)
                                                          ∂ui
As a result if
                                        ∂Γ(~u)
                                               = 0 at ~u = ~u0 ,                                (5.6.49)
                                          ∂~ui
then it follows from (5.6.46)-(5.6.48), (5.6.43) that

                                       Γ(~u0 ) = −W (J~ = 0) = −Sstat .                         (5.6.50)

Thus the computation of Sstat can be done by first calculating Γ(~u) and then evaluating it at its
extremum. Γ(~u) in turn can be calculated by regarding this as a sum of one particle irreducible
(1PI) Feynman diagrams in the zero dimensional field theory with action F (~τ ) + 2 ln τ2 . Since
Sstat is given by the value of the function −Γ(~u) at its extremum, we can identify −Γ(~u) as the
entropy function for the statistical entropy in analogy with the corresponding result for black hole
entropy [3, 4].
   A convenient method of calculating Γ(~u) is the so called background field method. For this we
choose some arbitrary base point ~τB and define
                                           Z
                              WB (~   ~
                                  τB ,J)         d2 η                    ~
                            e            =               2
                                                           e−F (~τB +~η)+J·~η ,                 (5.6.51)
                                             (τB2 + η2 )
                                                                                 ~
                                                                      ∂WB (~τB , J)
                                   ~ ) = J~ · χ
                         ΓB (~τB , χ                        ~ ,
                                              ~ − WB (~τB , J)        χi =          .           (5.6.52)
                                                                          ∂Ji
By shifting the integration variable in (5.6.51) to ~τ = ~τB + ~η it follows easily that

                                                  ~ = W (J)
                                        WB (~τB , J)     ~ − ~τB · J~ ,                         (5.6.53)

                                                         140
and hence
                                            ΓB (~τB , χ
                                                      ~ ) = Γ(~τB + χ
                                                                    ~) .                              (5.6.54)

Thus the computation of Γ(~u) reduces to the computation of ΓB (~u, χ    ~ = 0). The latter in turn
can be computed as the sum of 1PI vacuum diagrams in the 0-dimensional field theory with action
F (~u + ~η ) + 2 ln(u2 + η2 ), with ~η regarded as fundamental fields, and ~u regarded as some fixed
background.
   While this gives a definition of the statistical entropy function whose extremization leads to the
statistical entropy, the entropy function constructed this way is not manifestly invariant under the
S-duality transformation given in (3.1.36). This is due to the fact that since the S-duality trans-
                                                                            ~ defined in (5.6.46) and
formation has a non-linear action on (τ1 , τ2 ), the generating function W (J)
hence also the effective action Γ(~u) defined in (5.6.47) does not have manifest S-duality symmetries.
Of course the statistical entropy obtained by extremizing Γ(~u) will be duality invariant since this is
given in terms of the manifestly duality invariant integral (5.6.44). In appendix F we have described
a slightly different construction based on Riemann normal coordinates which yields a manifestly
duality invariant statistical entropy function. The result of this analysis is that instead of using the
function −ΓB (~τ ) as the statistical entropy function we can use a different manifestly duality invariant
function −ΓeB (~τ ) as the statistical entropy function. ΓeB (~τB ) is defined as the sum of 1PI vacuum
diagrams computed from the action
                                  !   ∞
                       1             X   1
                − ln            ~
                          sinh |ξ| −        (τB2 )n ξi1 . . . ξin Di1 · · · Din F (~τ )       ,       (5.6.55)
                       ~
                      |ξ|                n!                                             ~
                                                                                        τ =~
                                                                                           τB
                                     n=0

where ξ = ξ1 + iξ2 is to be regarded as a zero dimensional complex quantum field, τB is a fixed zero
dimensional complex background field and Dτ , Dτ̄ are duality invariant covariant derivatives defined
recursively through the relation:

                             Dτ (Dτm Dτ̄n F (~τ )) = (∂τ − im/τ2 )(Dτm Dτ̄n F (~τ )),
                             Dτ̄ (Dτm Dτ̄n F (~τ )) = (∂τ̄ + in/τ2 )(Dτm Dτ̄n F (~τ )) ,              (5.6.56)

for any arbitrary ordering of Dτ and Dτ̄ in Dτm Dτ̄n F (~τ ). The result of this computation expresses
eB (~τB ) in terms of manifestly duality invariant quantity F (~τ ) and its duality covariant derivatives.
Γ
It has been shown in appendix F that explicit evaluation of Γ   eB (~τ ) gives

    eB (~τ ) =    π
   −Γ                |Q − τ P |2 − ln g(τ ) − ln g(−τ̄ ) − (k + 2) ln(2τ2 ) + ln(4πK0 ) + O(Q−2 ) .   (5.6.57)
                 2τ2


                                                        141
                                                                                      ~ P~ ) calculated
In order to see how good this approximation is, we give below the exact results for d(Q,
                               ~ P
from (5.1.3) and Sstat ≡ ln d(Q, ~ ) for certain values of Q2 , P 2 and Q · P in the case of heterotic
string theory on T 6 , ı.e. the N = 1, M = K3 model.39 We also give the approximate statistical
            (0)                                                                     (1)
entropies Sstat calculated with the ‘tree level’ statistical entropy function, and Sstat calculated with
the ‘tree level’ plus ‘one loop’ statistical entropy function.40
                                                                                 (0)      (1)
                            Q2     P2    Q·P       d(Q, P )          Sstat     Sstat    Sstat

                            2      2     0         50064             10.82 6.28         10.62

                            4      4     0         32861184          17.31 12.57 16.90

                            6      6     0         16193130552 23.51 18.85 23.19

                            6      6     1         11232685725 23.14 18.59 22.88

                            6      6     2         4173501828        22.15 17.77 21.94

                            6      6     3         920577636         20.64 16.32 20.41

                            6      6     4         110910300         18.52 14.05 18.40

       Up to an additive constant (5.6.57) agrees with the black hole entropy function for these models
as given in (3.1.47) if we identify τ as ua + iuS . This in turn implies agreement between black hole
entropy and statistical entropy to this order. We should however keep in mind that the computation
of the black hole entropy function has been done by including in the effective action only a certain
subset of four derivative terms proportional to the Gauss-Bonnet term. As discussed at the end of
                                    p
§3.1.4, for large uS or equivalently Q2 P 2 − (Q · P )2 >> P 2 , the argument of [19,20,22] tell us that
the result computed using the Gauss-Bonnet term is the correct answer to this order. But there is
no such concrete result for finite uS . Nevertheless the agreement between the black hole and the
statistical entropy indicates that there might exist such a non-renormalization theorem even for finite
uS .
   Finally we would like to note that even though the complete spectrum changes discontinuously
as we cross a wall of marginal stability, the large charge expansion is not affected by this change. We
  39
    In this case K0 = 1/4π and the additive constant in (5.6.57) vanishes.
  40
    In this table the sign of Q · P has been chosen in such a way that in deforming the original contour lying at ve2 < 0
to the final contour corresponding to ρe2 , ve2 , σ
                                                  e2 given by η1 (ǫ), η2 (ǫ), η3 (ǫ) given in (5.6.22) we do not pass through
the pole at ve = 0. For the other choice of the sign of Q · P we need to pass through this pole. This will give an
additional contribution to Sstat . Although this contribution is exponentially suppressed for large charges, it may not
be negligible for the charges used in this table.

                                                            142
can illustrate this by considering the example of the marginal stability wall separating the domains
R and L defined at the end of §5.4. As we cross this wall, the prescription for the integration contour
changes from ve2 = −M3 to ve2 = M3 , keeping ρe2 and σe2 at fixed values M1 , M2 >> M3 . It is easy
to see that the only pole through which the contour passes during this deformation is the one at
v = 0. Thus the difference between the two cases is the residue of the integrand at e
e                                                                                   v = 0. Since this
pole is not in the class given in (5.6.4) with n2 = 1, the contribution from this pole is exponentially
suppressed compared to the leading contribution. A careful analysis shows that the same story is
repeated as we cross other marginal stability walls [168].
   This result is consistent with the fact that on the black hole side the attractor point described
in §3.1.1 is a stable supersymmetric attractor for P 2 > 0, Q2 > 0, P 2Q2 > (Q · P )2. Thus the near
horizon geometry of these black holes is always given by this attractor point and is independent of
the asymptotic moduli even if the asymptotic moduli cross one or more walls of marginal stability.
We shall see in §5.7 that the exponentially suppressed changes in the degeneracy across the walls of
marginal stability can be related to the (dis)appearance of two centered black hole solutions as we
cross these walls.

5.7    Jump in degeneracy and two centered black holes
Given the success of the analysis of the previous section relating the black hole entropy to the
statistical entropy, we can now ask: can we understand the jump in the degeneracy across walls
of marginal stability on the black hole side? The issue is somewhat tricky since these jumps in the
degeneracy are exponentially small compared to the leading contribution to the entropy. Nevertheless
since the change is discontinuous, one might hope that there is a clear mechanism on the black hole
side which produces these discontinuous changes across the walls of marginal stability and if we can
identify this mechanism then we may be able to reproduce these jumps on the black hole side. In this
section we shall show that there is indeed a clear mechanism on the black hole side that describes
these jumps, – this is the phenomenon of (dis)appearance of multicentered black hole solutions for a
given total charge as we cross various walls of marginal stability in the space of asymptotic values of
the moduli fields [140, 142, 143, 144, 145, 146]. In particular the exponential of the entropy associated
with these multi-centered black holes will reproduce the jump in the degeneracy computed from
the exact dyon spectrum. Our analysis will follow [154]. Related observations have been made
in [167, 150].
   In order to keep the analysis simple we shall restrict our analysis to the four dimensional charge



                                                  143
vectors of the type given in (5.1.1)
                                      
              0                   Q1 − 1
                               −J 
    ~ =  −n/N  ,
    Q                     P~ =                                n, J, Q1 , Q5 ∈ ZZ,    n, Q1 ≥ 0,
          0                    Q5  ,                                                            Q5 > 0 ,    (5.7.1)
             −1                      0

and consider M∞ of the form:
                                                                                 
                                                          b−2
                                                          R
                                                                R−2              
                                         M∞ = 
                                                                      b2
                                                                                  .
                                                                                                               (5.7.2)
                                                                       R
                                                                            R2

In this case eq.(5.4.14) describing the marginal stability wall takes the form

                                                                        b
                                                                       JR
                                    a∞ = ac ,         ac ≡ −                           S∞                       (5.7.3)
                                                                           b2 Q5 }
                                                                R{Q1 − 1 + R

for b = 0. By following carefully the duality chain relating the first and the second description
one finds that the weak coupling region of the first description corresponds to large values of R
parametrizing the matrix M∞ in (5.7.2). In this region the degeneracy formulæ for a∞ > ac and
a∞ < ac are given respectively by (5.1.3), (5.1.4) and a similar formula with the contour C replaced
by the contour Cb given in (5.1.13). If we denote them by d> (Q,
                                                               ~ P~ ) and d< (Q,
                                                                              ~ P~ ) respectively, then
the difference between them can be computed by evaluating the contribution from the pole of the
integrand at ve = 0 since this is the pole we encounter while deforming C to Cb [168]. Now from (C.26)
we know that for e v≃0Φ   e takes the form:

                                 e ρ, σ
                                 Φ(e     v ) = −4π 2 e
                                      e, e           v 2 f1 (N ρe)f2 (e         v4) ,
                                                                      σ /N) + O(e                               (5.7.4)

where (f1 (τ ))−1 and (f2 (τ ))−1 have the interpretation of the generating function for the degeneracies
of purely electric half-BPS states and purely magnetic half-BPS states respectively. Using (5.7.4)
and evaluating the residue at the pole of the integrand in (5.1.3) at e
                                                                      v = 0 we get

                           d> (Q, P ) − d< (Q, P ) = −(−1)Q·P +1 Q · P del (Q) dmag (P ) ,                      (5.7.5)

where
               Z 1                                                          Z N
                       −iπN ρeQ2                 −1                     1                   2
   del (Q) =         de
                      ρe           (f1 (N ρe))        ,     dmag (P ) =           de                 σ /N))−1
                                                                                   σ e−iπeσP /N (f2 (e          (5.7.6)
                0                                                       N    0


                                                                144
are the degeneracies of purely electric and purely magnetic half-BPS states carrying charges Q and P
respectively. Thus ln del (Q) and ln dmag (P ) can be identified as the entropies of small black holes of
electric charge Q and magnetic charge P . Since ln |Q · P | is subleading compared to these entropies
for large Q2 and P 2 ı.e. for
                                         n, Q1 , Q5 >> 1 ,                                    (5.7.7)
we see that ln |d> (Q, P ) − d< (Q, P )| can be identified as the sum of the entropies of a small electric
black hole of charge Q and a small magnetic black hole of charge P . In carrying out the analysis on
the black hole side we shall choose charge vectors satisfying (5.7.7).
   It is known from the general analysis of [143, 145, 147] that a two centered black hole carrying
charges (Q, 0) and (0, P ) contributes to the index with a sign (−1)Q·P +1. Indeed, according to
these papers the contribution to the index due to a two centered black hole is given precisely by
(−1)Q·P +1 |Q · P | del (Q) dmag (P ).41 Taking into account the sign of the right hand side of (5.7.5),
and assuming that this phenomenon has a description in terms of (dis)appearance of a two centered
black hole carrying charges (Q, 0) and (0, P ), we can draw the following conclusion:42
For J(= Q · P ) > 0, as we cross the wall of marginal stability (5.7.3) from a∞ > ac to a∞ < ac , a
new two centered small black hole solution should appear with an electric center of charge Q and a
magnetic center of charge P . On the other hand for J(= Q · P ) < 0, as we cross the wall of marginal
stability (5.7.3) from a∞ < ac to a∞ > ac , a new two centered small black hole solution should appear
with an electric center of charge Q and a magnetic center of charge P .
  We shall now verify this explicitly. For describing the two centered black hole we shall use the
N = 2 supersymmetric description of the same system given in §3.2.2 in terms of the metric gµν ,
four scalar fields X I , four gauge fields AIµ and some additional auxiliary fields. We shall work in the
supergravity approximation in which case the prepotential (3.2.14) takes the form:
                                                          X 1X 2X 3
                                                  F =−              .                                             (5.7.8)
                                                             X0
Using the relations (3.2.20) between the charges qeI , peI in the STU model and the charge vector Q,
P in the N = 4 description we see that for the configuration (5.7.1) we have

                q0 , qe1 , qe2 , qe3 ) = (0, Q1 − 1, −1, −n/N),
               (e                                                    p0 , pe1 , pe2 , pe3 ) = (Q5 , 0, −J, 0) .
                                                                    (e                                            (5.7.9)
  41
     This formula was derived for black holes in N = 2 supersymmetric string theories, – we shall assume that it
holds also in the N = 4 theories. This is not unreasonable since these black holes can be embedded in the N = 2
supersymmetric S-T-U models.
  42
     Note that when a new configuration with same charge appears in the black hole system, its degeneracy (or more
precisely the index), ı.e. exponential of the entropy, will add to the degeneracy of the other configurations of the same
charge.

                                                          145
As discussed in §3.2.2, the theory has an underlying ‘gauge invariance’ that allows for a scaling of
all the X I ’s by a complex function. We shall fix this gauge using the gauge condition:

                               i(X̄ I FI − X I F̄I ) = 1 ,          FI ≡ ∂F/∂X I .                                (5.7.10)

This fixes the normalization but not the overall phase of the X I ’s. While studying a black hole
solution carrying a given set of charges, it will be convenient to fix the overall phase of the X I ’s such
that
                                          qI X I − peI FI ) = π
                                      Arg(e                            at ~r = ∞ .                                (5.7.11)

                                                                                           q (s) , pe(s) )
In this gauge one can construct a general multi-centered black hole solution with charges (e
located at ~rs following the procedure described in [140,141,142,144]. The locations ~rs are constrained
by the equations [140, 141, 142, 144]

                                                (s)
                                                       X pe(s)I qe(t) − qe(s) pe(t)I
                                  (s)I
                              hI pe      − hI qeI +                I        I
                                                                                       =0                         (5.7.12)
                                                       t6=s
                                                                   |~rs − ~rt |

where hI and hI are constants defined through the equations

                                I     I
                               X∞ − X̄∞ = ihI ,                 FI∞ − F̄I∞ = ihI .                                (5.7.13)

We shall not give the complete solution but will give the solution for the scalars for illustration. They
are obtained by solving the equations:
                                               !                                                          !
                              X pe(s)I                                                 X        (s)
                                                                                               qeI
          X I − X̄ I = i hI +                      ,          FI − F̄I = i hI +                               .   (5.7.14)
                              s
                                |~r − ~rs |                                            s
                                                                                            |~r − ~rs |

If we define α and β via the relations
                                                  0
                                                 X∞ = α + iβ ,                                                    (5.7.15)

then using (3.2.16), (3.2.18), (5.7.8) and (5.7.13) we get

                   h0 = 2β,    h1 = 2(βa∞ + αS∞ ),                  b
                                                             h2 = 2RRα,          b
                                                                           h3 = 2Rα/R,
                   h0 = −2Rb2 (αS∞ + βa∞ ),                    b2 , h2 = 2R(βS
                                                       h1 = 2β R          b    ∞ − αa∞ )/R,

                         b
                   h3 = 2RR(βS  ∞ − αa∞ ) .                                                                       (5.7.16)

The gauge condition (5.7.10) gives

                                                         b2 S∞ )−1 .
                                            α2 + β 2 = (8R                                                        (5.7.17)

                                                          146
    To proceed further we need to focus on a specific two centered solution with electric charge Q
at one center and a magnetic charge P at the other center.43 Using (3.2.20), (5.7.1) we see that the
charges at the two centers are given by:

 qe(1) = (0, 0, −1, −n/N),       pe(1) = (0, 0, 0, 0),    qe(2) = (0, Q1 −1, 0, 0),   pe(2) = (Q5 , 0, −J, 0) . (5.7.18)

Eqs.(5.7.12) for s = 1 and 2 now give:

                                                           n 3 J
                                                   h2 +      h = ,                                             (5.7.19)
                                                           N    L
                                                               J
                                       h0 Q5 − h2 J − h1 (Q1 − 1) +
                                                                  = 0,                         (5.7.20)
                                                               L
where L = |~r1 − ~r2 | is the separation between the two centers.44 Using (5.7.16) and (5.7.19) we get

                                                          J    1
                                                 α=                   .                                        (5.7.21)
                                                             b + n Rb
                                                         2L RR
                                                                   N R

Using (5.7.16) and (5.7.21) we may now express (5.7.20) as
                                    !                                            !
                               b ∞
                               RJS                                     n R   b ∞
                                                                         b RJa
    β a∞ (Q1 − 1 + R b2 Q5 ) +        + α (Q1 − 1 + R  b2 Q5 )S∞ − RR
                                                                   b −     −       = 0.
                                R                                      NR     R
                                                                                   (5.7.22)
Substituting α and β computed from (5.7.21), (5.7.22) into (5.7.17) we can determine L. The
ambiguity in determining the sign of L can be fixed using (5.7.11).
   We are interested in determining under what conditions the two centered black hole solution
described above exists. For this we note that a sensible solution should have positive value of L.
  43
      In the supergravity approximation the solution is singular at each center, but once higher derivative corrections
are taken into account each center is transformed into the near horizon geometry of a non-singular extremal black
hole with finite entropy equal to the statistical entropy of the corresponding microstates as described in §3.3, §4.4.
As we have seen, this phenomenon can be demonstrated explicitly for purely electrically charged small black holes
representing fundamental heterotic string [96, 98, 99, 100, 101, 174, 175, 176, 19] and hence also their S-dual purely
magnetic states. In this case the modifications of the two centered solution due to higher derivative corrections can
be found using the method developed in [88]. This approach fails for small black holes describing fundamental type
II string compactification and hence also their S-dual purely magnetic states. However it is expected that once the
effect of full set of higher derivative terms are taken into account the entropy of a small black hole in type II string
theory will also reproduce the statistical entropy of the corresponding microstates [93, 95], – see [106] for some recent
progress on this issue.
   44
      Note that this is the coordinate separation. In order to express this in physical units e.g. string length, we need
to examine the asymptotic metric associated with this solution and also the relation between the metric appearing in
the N = 2 supersymmetric S-T-U model and the string metric Gµν that appears naturally in the N = 4 supergravity
action (3.1.3).


                                                            147
Typically as we change the values of the asymptotic moduli keeping the charges fixed, the value of
L changes. On some subspace of codimension 1 the value of L becomes infinite and beyond that the
solution gives negative values of L which means that a physical solution does not exist. To determine
this codimension 1 subspace we simply need to determine the conditions on the asymptotic moduli
for which L = ∞. From (5.7.21) we see that in this case α = 0. Since eq.(5.7.17) now requires β to
be non-zero, we see from (5.7.22) that

                                             b2 Q5 ) + RJS
                                a∞ (Q1 − 1 + R         b ∞ /R = 0 .                            (5.7.23)

This is identical to the condition (5.7.3) for marginal stability [140]. Thus we conclude that as a∞
passes through ac , the two centered black hole solution carrying an entropy equal to the sum of the
entropies of a small electric black hole of charge Q and a small magnetic black hole of charge P ,
(dis)appears from the spectrum. This is precisely what was predicted earlier by analyzing the exact
formula for the degeneracy of dyons.
   In order to complete the verification of the predictions made earlier we need to determine on
which side of the a∞ = ac line the two centered solution exists. For this we use eq.(5.7.11). For the
solution under consideration this gives, using (5.7.22),
                                                                                       
                                     !                    b 2          b     b
                                                                            n R    b ∞ 2
                                                                                   RJa
                              b ∞
                             RJS              (Q1 − 1 + R Q5 )S∞ − RR − N R − R           
                     b 2
   α a∞ (Q1 − 1 + R Q5 ) +               1+                                                 < 0.
                                R      
                                                                   b 2     b ∞ 2
                                                                            RJS            
                                                                                           
                                                       a∞ (Q1 − 1 + R Q5 ) + R
                                                                                              (5.7.24)
First consider the case J > 0. Since L must be positive for the two centered solution to exist, we
see from (5.7.21) that α > 0. In this case the term on the left hand side of (5.7.24) is negative for
a∞ < ac and positive for a∞ > ac . Thus the inequality is satisfied only for a∞ < ac , leading to the
conclusion that the two centered black hole exists only for a∞ < ac . A similar analysis shows that for
J < 0, the two centered black hole exists only for a∞ > ac . This is exactly what has been predicted
earlier from the analysis of the exact dyon spectrum of the theory.


6    Open Questions and Speculation on N = 2
We end by reviewing some of the questions left open in our analysis. Some of these issues are technical
in nature while some others are conceptual. We also speculate on the degeneracy of dyons in N = 2
supersymmetric string theories.



                                                 148
• Non-locality of the 1PI action: The entropy function formalism described in this article
  gives us a way to calculate the entropy of an extremal black hole with a given set of charges
  in a given theory assuming that such a black hole solution exists. The main ingredient in this
  computation is the assumption that the underlying theory is described by a local generally
  covariant and gauge invariant action and also that the near horizon geometry of an extremal
  black hole has SO(2, 1) isometry associated with an AdS2 factor.
  It is natural to expect that the formalism also works for studying quantum corrected entropy
  provided we replace the classical Lagrangian density in the expression for the entropy function
  by the quantum Lagrangian density associated with one particle irreducible effective action.
  Indeed this was an underlying assumption in studying the effect of Gauss-Bonnet term on the
  entropy of N = 4 supersymmetric black holes, since some part of the Gauss-Bonnet term comes
  from quantum corrections. This is also natural from the point of view of duality symmetries
  since classical higher derivative corrections in one description of the theory may appear as
  quantum effects in a different description and the entropy of the black hole must be given by
  a duality invariant expression. However this assumption suffers from an intrinsic problem that
  sooner or later we shall encounter non-local terms in the quantum effective action, and the
  current formulation of the entropy function does not allow us to deal with non-local terms in
  the action. It seems natural that the way to deal with such terms is to generalize the notion of
  entropy being an extremum of entropy function to the entropy being the result of an appropriate
  functional integral in the background of an AdS2 geometry. It will be interesting to make this
  into a more precise conjecture.

• N = 2 dyon spectrum: Given the success in finding the dyon spectrum in N = 4 su-
  persymmetric string compactifications, one could hope that the dyon degeneracy in N = 2
  supersymmetric string theories will also be given by a similar formula:
                                             Z
                                    ~  ~
                                 d(Q, P ) = dM f (Q,  ~ P~ , M) ,                            (6.1)
                                              C
  where M denotes a set of complex variables, C is a contour in the complex manifold labelled
                              ~ P~ , M) is an appropriate function of the charges and the complex
  by the variables M, and f (Q,
  variables M. One could further speculate that f (Q, ~ P~ , M) has the structure
                                                                              
                ~  ~                (1)            (2)             (3)
             f (Q, P , M) = exp fij (M)Qi Qj + fij (M)Pi Pj + fij (M)Qi Pj g(M) ,            (6.2)
          (s)
  where fij (M) are simple functions of M and g(M) encodes all the non-trivial properties of
  the theory. The degeneracies in different domains in the moduli space bounded by walls of

                                             149
  marginal stability will correspond to different choices of contour C, and as we cross the walls of
  marginal stability the choice of the contour will change. The jump in the degeneracy can then
  be computed by evaluating the residues of the integrand at the poles that we encounter as we
  deform the contour. On the other hand from the analysis of [143, 145, 147] we know that for a
         ~ P~ ) → (Q
  decay (Q,        ~ 1 , P~1 ) + (Q
                                  ~ −Q
                                     ~ 1 , P~ − P~1 ) this jump is given by
               ~ P~ ) = (−1)Q1 ·P −Q·P1+1 |Q1 · P − Q · P1 | d(Q
            ∆d(Q,                                              ~ 1, P~1 )d(Q
                                                                           ~ −Q
                                                                              ~ 1 , P~ − P~1 ) .   (6.3)
  Since for N = 2 supersymmetric string theories all BPS states are half-BPS, the above equation
                                               ~ P~ , M) at various poles to contour integrals of the
  would relate the residues of the function f (Q,
               ~ 1 , P~1 , M) and f (Q
  functions f (Q                     ~ −Q
                                        ~ 1 , P~ − P~1 , M). This in effect would give a set of bootstrap
                                         ~ P~ , M) for different Q,
  relations involving the integrands f (Q,                         ~ P~ , M. Under favourble conditions
  we may even be able to solve these bootstrap equations to extract the form of the functions
     ~ P~ , M).
  f (Q,

• Non-renormalization of the Gauss-Bonnet contribution: One of the small miracles in
  our analysis has been that in a class of string theories, by taking into account either the tree
  level Gauss-Bonnet term or the N = 2 supersymmetric generalization of the curvature squared
  terms, we recover the exact results for the entropy of a dyonic black hole in the large electric
  charge approximation. This is surprising because there are additional corrections to the tree
  level effective action which could affect the calculation of the entropy. Indeed for a similar non-
  supersymmetric black hole, related to the supersymmetric black hole by the reversal of sign
  of one of the charges, neither the Gauss-Bonnet term nor the supersymmetric generalization
  of the curvature squared term gives the correct answer for the entropy. It will be important
  to understand the origin of the underlying non-renormalization theorem in more detail. It is
  especially important in view of the fact that for the case where the electric and the magnetic
  charges are comparable the complete answer for the black hole entropy is not known. Thus
  if there is an underlying non-renormalization theorem that tells us that including just the
  effect of Gauss-Bonnet term is sufficient even in this case, then it would give us a way to
  calculate the entropy of the dyonic black holes for comparable electric and magnetic charges.
  The agreement between the statistical entropy and the answer for the entropy computed from
  the Gauss-Bonnet action seems to point towards the existence of such a non-renormalization
  theorem.

• Small black holes: The statistical entropy of a small black hole in heterotic string theory,
  whose microscopic description involves excitations of a fundamental heterotic string, agree with

                                                150
       the black hole entropy after taking into account the effect of higher derivative corrections in
       the effective action. Although initial analysis took into account only a small part of the higher
       derivative corrections and the agreement between the two answers was puzzling, we now have
       a good understanding of this agreement under the assumption that the near horizon geometry
       of these black holes have an underlying locally AdS3 space. Unfortunately the same analysis
       does not produce a similar agreement for small black holes describing excited states of the
       fundamental type II string. The most naive explanation seems to be that these black holes
       do not have an underlying AdS3 factor in their near horizon geometry; however a different
       explanation has been suggested in [105, 106, 107, 108]. It will be useful to resolve this issue one
       way or the other and also to extend the analysis to small black holes in higher dimensions.

    • OSV conjecture: One question that naturally comes to mind is: is there a possible connection
      between the results on black hole entropy discussed here with the OSV conjecture [2]? There are
       two aspects of the OSV conjecture. The first one gives a prescription for relating the microscopic
       degeneracy of states to the topological string partition function. Most of the precision tests of
       the OSV conjecture has been carried out in this context. Since we have an exact expression
       for the degeneracy of states in a class of N = 4 supersymmetric string theories, one can in
       principle try to see if this can be reproduced using the OSV conjecture. This would be a test
       of the first aspect of the conjecture. Some attempts in this direction have been made in [15].
       The second aspect of OSV conjecture – which is much less studied45 – relates Wald’s entropy
       to the statistical entropy. However the statistical entropy, instead of being computed in the
       microcanonical ensemble, is computed in a mixed ensemble where magnetic charges and the
       chemical potentials dual to the electric charges are fixed. If both aspects of the OSV conjecture
       are correct then this would amount to the statement that Wald’s entropy of a black hole in
       N ≥ 2 supersymmetric string theory receives contribution only from the F-terms modulo some
       corrections discussed in [15, 145]. This seems strange since the effective action is known to
       receive other corrections. It is conceivable (although by no means proven) that if one computes
       Wald’s entropy using the Wilsonian effective action then only the F-terms contribute to the
       entropy. We have not followed this approach. Instead we calculate Wald’s entropy using the
       one particle irreducible (1PI) effective action46 and relate it directly to the statistical entropy
  45
     Even the precision tests of [175, 176] involving small black holes really tests the relation between the topological
string partition function and the microscopic degeneracy since the ‘Wald entropy’ that was used in this test was
computed using only the F-term corrections, and in this approximation it is directly related to the topological string
partition function.
  46
     This is reflected for example in the ln S term in the coefficient of the Gauss-Bonnet term as given in eqs.(3.1.38),

                                                          151
       computed in the microcanonical ensemble. This approach has the advantage that both the
       Wald’s entropy computed using the one particle irreducible (1PI) effective action and the
       microcanonical entropy are manifestly duality invariant in the sense described at the end of
       §2.3. Thus we compare two duality invariant quantities. The disadvantage of this approach is
       the intrinsic non-local nature of the 1PI effective action discussed earlier.

   Before concluding I would like to emphasize again that this article reviews only some special
aspects of extremal black hole entropy. Various other recent references on entropy function and
attractor mechanism can be found in [177, 178, 179, 180, 181, 182, 183, 184, 185, 186, 187, 188, 189, 190,
191, 192, 193, 194, 195, 196, 197, 198, 199, 200, 201, 202, 203, 204, 205, 206, 207, 208, 209, 210, 211, 212, 213,
214, 215, 216, 217, 218, 219, 220, 221, 222, 223, 224, 225, 226, 227, 228, 229, 230, 231, 232, 233, 234, 235, 236,
237, 238, 239, 240, 241, 242, 243, 244, 245, 246].

Acknowledgement: I would like to thank my collaborators Dumitru Astefanesei, Nabamita Baner-
jee, Atish Dabholkar, Justin David, Kevin Goldstein, Norihiro Iizuka, Ashik Iqubal, Dileep Jatkar,
Rudra Jena, Bindusar Sahoo, Masaki Shigemori and Sandip Trivedi for many useful discussions.
Much of this review is based on the work done in various collaborations with them. I would also like
to thank Nabamita Banerjee and Rajesh Gupta for their comments on the manuscript. These notes
arose out of lectures given at the IPM string school at Tehran (April 2006), IOPB string school at
Bhubaneswar (September 2006), the first Asian string school at Seoul (January 2007) and Prestrings
meeting at Granada (June 2007). I would like to thank the organisers of these meetings for support.
Finally I would like to thank the people of India for their generous support to string theory.


A       The Sign Conventions
In this appendix we shall fix the sign conventions for the charges carried by various branes, as well
as the sign convention for the duality transformations relating the two descriptions of the N = 4
supersymmetric string theories introduced in §3.1.2: as a ZZN orbifold of type IIB string theory
on M × Se1 × S 1 for M = K3 or T 4 and as an asymmetric ZZN orbifold of heterotic or type IIA
string theory on T 4 × Sb1 × S 1 . The series of duality transformations taking us from the first to
the second description are: an S-duality transformation on type IIB string theory, a T-duality on
Se1 mapping the theory to a ZZN orbifold of type IIA string theory on M × Sb1 × S 1 , and finally a
(3.1.40).



                                                       152
string-string duality transformation taking this to an asymmetric ZZN orbifold of heterotic / type
IIA string theory on T 4 × Sb1 × S 1 for M = K3 / M = T 4 .
    We denote by y the coordinate along S 1 , by ψ the coordinate along Se1 , by χ the coordinate along
the circle Sb1 dual to Se1 , by t the time coordinate and by (r, θ, φ) the spherical polar coordinates of
                                                                                                     (k)
the non-compact space. Let BM N denote the NSNS 2-form fields, gM N denote the metric, and CM N
denote the RR k-form field subject to the relations

                                 ∗ dC (k) = (−1)k(k−1)/2 dC (8−k) + · · · ,                         (A.1)

where ∗ denotes Hodge dual and · · · represent non-linear terms. In defining the Hodge dual in the
first description we choose the ǫ tensor such that after dimensional reduction on K3, ǫtyψrθφ > 0. The
chain of duality transformations taking us from the first to the second description are chosen so that
at the linearized level the first S-duality transformation of IIB acts as C (2) → B, B → −C (2) , the next
R → 1/R duality transformations of Se1 acts as gψµ → −Bχµ , Bψµ → −gχµ together with appropriate
transformations on the various RR gauge fields, and the final string string duality transformation
acts via a Hodge duality transformation in six dimensions on the NS sector 3-form field strength
with ǫtχyrθφ > 0, and maps various four dimensional gauge fields arising from various components
of the RR sector fields to the 24 (8) NS sector gauge fields in heterotic (type IIA) string theory on
T 4 . Finally, we use the following convention for the signs of the charges carried by various branes. If
F (3) ≡ dC (2) denotes the RR 3-form field strength, then asymptotically a D1-brane along S 1 carries
            (3)                                                (3)
positive Fyrt , a D5-brane along Se1 × K3 carries positive F , a D1-brane along Se1 carries positive
                                                                θyφ
 (3)                                                          (3)
Fψrt and a D5-brane along S 1 × K3 carries negative Fθψφ . The same convention is followed for
fundamental string and NS 5-brane with F (3) replaced by the NSNS 3-form field strength H = dB.
A state carrying positive momentum along S 1 or Se1 is defined to be the one which produces positive
∂r gyt or ∂r gψt , and a positively charged Kaluza-Klein monopole associated with the circle S 1 or Se1
is defined to be the one that carries positive ∂θ gyφ or ∂θ gψφ . Using the relation between C (2) and
C (6) given in (A.1) one can verify that a D5-brane wrapped on K3 × S 1 carries negative (dC (6) )K3,yrt
asymptotically.


B      A Class of (4,4) Superconformal Field Theories
In this appendix we shall introduce a class of (4,4) superconformal field theories and study their
properties. These have been used in §5 for precision counting of dyon states in N = 4 supersymmetric
string theories based on ZZN orbifolds. These will also be used in appendix H for computing the
coefficient of the Gauss-Bonnet term in the effective action of these string theories.

                                                   153
    Let M be either a K3 or a T 4 manifold, and let e
                                                    g be an order N discrete symmetry transformation
acting on M. We shall choose e   g in such a way that it satisfies the following properties (not all of
which are independent):

   1. We require that in an appropriate complex coordinate system of M, e
                                                                        g preserves the (0,2) and
      (2,0) harmonic forms of M.

   2. Let f                                                                         c = M/ f
           ZZN denote the group generated by ge. We shall require that the orbifold M      ZZN
      has SU(2) holonomy.

   3. Let ωi denote the harmonic 2-forms of M and
                                                  Z
                                            Iij =   ωi ∧ ωj                                                   (B.1)
                                                                   M

         denote the intersection matrix of these 2-forms in M. When we diagonalize I we get 3 eigen-
         values −1 and a certain number (say P ) of the eigenvalues +1 (P = 19 for K3 and 3 for T 4 ).
         We call the 2-forms carrying eigenvalue −1 right-handed or self-dual 2-forms and the 2-forms
         carrying eigenvalues +1 left-handed or anti-selfdual 2-forms. We shall choose e
                                                                                       g such that it
         leaves invariant all the right-handed 2-forms.47

   4. The (4, 4) superconformal field theory with target space M has SU(2)L × SU(2)R R-symmetry
      group. We shall require that the transformation e   g commutes with the (4,4) superconformal
      symmetry and the SU(2)L × SU(2)R R-symmetry group of the theory. (For M = T 4 the
         supersymmetry and the R-symmetry groups are bigger, but e
                                                                 g must be such that only the (4,4)
         superconformal symmetry and the SU(2)L × SU(2)R part of the R-symmetry group commute
         with e
              g .)

       Let us now take an orbifold of this (4,4) superconformal field theory by the group f
                                                                                          ZZN generated
by the transformation e
                      g , and define [247]
                            1                                                      
         F (r,s) (τ, z) ≡               g s (−1)FL +FR e2πiτ L0 e−2πiτ̄ L̄0 e2πiFL z ,
                              T rRR;egr e                                                0 ≤ r, s ≤ N − 1 ,   (B.2)
                            N
                                                                       g r in the SCFT described
where T rRR;egr denotes trace over all the RR sector states twisted by e
above before we project on to e
                              g invariant states, Ln , L̄n denote the left- and right-moving Virasoro
  47
    We should note that there is no correlation between left- and right-handed 2-forms and left- and right-moving
degrees of freedom on the world-sheet of the sigma model with target space M.



                                                               154
generators and FL and FR denote the world-sheet fermion numbers associated with left and right-
moving sectors in this SCFT.48 As mentioned earlier we include in the definition of L0 , L̄0 additive
factors of −cL /24 and −cR /24 respectively, so that RR sector ground state has L0 = L̄0 = 0. Due
to the insertion of (−1)FR factor in the trace the contribution to F (r,s) comes only from the L̄0 = 0
states. As a result F (r,s) does not depend on τ̄ .
   The quantities FL , FR can be identified as twice the third generators of the SU(2)L and SU(2)R
R-symmetry algebras respectively. As a result the z-dependence of F (r,s) (τ, z) is determined by the
characters of the SU(2)L current algebra. Since for the SCFT under consideration the SU(2)L ,
SU(2)R current algebras have level 1, the only SU(2)L primaries which can appear in the spectrum
are those corresponding to isospins 0 and 12 . The associated characters are given by ϑ3 (2τ, 2z) and
ϑ2 (2τ, 2z) respectively. Thus the functions F (r,s) (τ, z) have the form
                                                        (r,s)                              (r,s)
                               F (r,s) (τ, z) = h0              (τ ) ϑ3 (2τ, 2z) + h1              (τ ) ϑ2 (2τ, 2z)                (B.3)
                       (r,s)                 (r,s)                                      (r,s)
for some functions h0          (τ ) and h1           (τ ). The functions hb                     (τ ) in turn have expansions of the form
                                               (r,s)
                                                                     X          (r,s)
                                             hb        (τ ) =                  cb       (4k)e2πikτ .                               (B.4)
                                                                           2
                                                                    1
                                                                 k∈ N zz− b4
                                    (r,s)
This defines the coefficients cb (u). We shall justify the restriction on the allowed values of k shortly.
Using the known expansion of ϑ3 and ϑ2 :
                                     X                           2
                                                                                                      X                    2
                  ϑ3 (2τ, 2z) =               e2πijz eπiτ j /2 ,            ϑ2 (2τ, 2z) =                     e2πijz eπiτ j /2 ,   (B.5)
                                     j∈2zz                                                          j∈2zz+1

we get
                                                    1
                                                    X                X          (r,s)
                          F (r,s) (τ, z) =                                     cb       (4n − j 2 )e2πinτ +2πijz .                 (B.6)
                                                    b=0 j∈2zz+b,n∈zz/N

    F (r,s) (τ, 0) defined from (B.2) can be regarded as the partition function of the superconformal
field theory on a torus with appropriate twisted boundary condition along the a and the b cycles.
From this it follows that                                           
                                            (r,s)       aτ + b
                                      F                        ,0        = F (cs+ar,ds+br) (τ, 0) .                                (B.7)
                                                        cτ + d
  48
    At this stage we are describing an abstract conformal field theory without connecting it to string theory. In all
cases where we use this conformal field theory to describe a fundamental string world-sheet theory or world-volume
theory of some soliton, we shall use the Green-Schwarz formulation. Thus the world-sheet fermion number of this
SCFT will represent the space-time fermion number in string theory.


                                                                         155
Using (B.3) and the known modular transformation properties of Jacobi ϑ-functions it then follows
that                                                      
                    (r,s)   aτ + b    z                 cz 2
                  F                ,        = exp 2πi          F (cs+ar,ds+br) (τ, z) .     (B.8)
                            cτ + d cτ + d             cτ + d
                                                                                       (r,s)
   The functions F (r,s) (τ, z) or equivalently the coefficients cb                            (u) contain information about the
               r
spectrum of e
            g twisted L̄0 = 0 states of the superconformal field theory, carrying definite e
                                                                                           g , L0 and FL
quantum numbers. In the rest of this appendix we shall study various properties of these coefficients.
First of all, since in the RR sector the L0 eigenvalue is ≥ 0 for any state, it follows from (B.3)-(B.5)
that
                           (r,s)                        (r,s)
                          c0 (u) = 0 for u < 0,       c1 (u) = 0 for u < −1 .                        (B.9)
                              
         a b            −1 0
Using              =               in (B.8) we get F (r,s) (τ, z) = F (−r,−s)(τ, −z). It then follows from
          c d            0 −1
(B.3), (B.6), that
                     (r,s)          (−r,−s)                (r,s)             (−r,−s)
                   hb (τ ) = hb   (τ ) ,       cb (u) = cb        (u) ,    for b = 0, 1 .            (B.10)
                                        
                        a b         1 1
Furthermore, taking             =              in (B.8) we get F (r,s) (τ + 1, z) = F (r,s+r) (τ, z). Since
                        c d         0 1
(r, s) are defined modulo N we get F (r,s) (τ, z) = F (r,s) (τ + N, z). This is the physical origin of the
restriction n ∈ ZZ/N in (B.6) and k ∈ ZZ/N − b2 /4 in (B.4).
    The n = 0 terms in the expansion (B.6) is given by the contribution to (B.2) from the RR sector
states with L0 = L̄0 = 0. For r = 0, ı.e. in the untwisted sector, these states are in one to one
correspondence with harmonic (p, q) forms on M, with (p − 1) and (q − 1) measuring the quantum
                                                                              (0,s)
numbers FL and FR [248, 249]. Comparing (B.2) with (B.6) we now see that N c0 (0), being N×
the coefficient of the n = 0, j = 0 term in (B.6), measures the number of harmonic (1, q) forms
                                                                     (0,s)
weighted by (−1)q−1 e
                    g s and summed over q, and N c1 (−1), being N× the coefficient of the n = 0,
j = −1 (or j = 1) term in (B.6), measures the number of harmonic (0, q) (or (2, q)) forms weighted
by (−1)q e
         g s and summed over q. If M = K3 then the only (0, q) forms are (0, 0) and (0, 2) forms
both of which are invariant under e
                                  g . Thus we have

                                              (0,s)            2
                                          c1          (−1) =       for M = K3 .                                            (B.11)
                                                               N
On the other hand for M = T 4 one can represent the explicit action of e
                                                                       g in an appropriate complex
coordinate system (z 1 , z 2 ) as

        dz 1 → e2πi/N dz 1 ,   dz 2 → e−2πi/N dz 2 ,           dz̄ 1 → e−2πi/N dz̄ 1 ,            dz̄ 2 → e2πi/N dz̄ 2 .   (B.12)

                                                               156
Using this one can work out its action on all the 2-, 3- and 4-forms:

           dz 1 ∧ dz 2 → dz 1 ∧ dz 2 ,        dz 1 ∧ dz̄ 1 → dz 1 ∧ dz̄ 1 ,         dz 1 ∧ dz̄ 2 → e4πi/N dz 1 ∧ dz̄ 2 ,
           dz̄ 1 ∧ dz̄ 2 → dz̄ 1 ∧ dz̄ 2 ,    dz 2 ∧ dz̄ 2 → dz 2 ∧ dz̄ 2 ,         dz̄ 1 ∧ dz 2 → e−4πi/N dz̄ 1 ∧ dz 2 ,
                                                                                                                             (B.13)


         dz 1 ∧ dz 2 ∧ dz̄ 1 → e−2πi/N dz 1 ∧ dz 2 ∧ dz̄ 1 ,              dz 1 ∧ dz 2 ∧ dz̄ 2 → e2πi/N dz 1 ∧ dz 2 ∧ dz̄ 2 ,
         dz̄ 1 ∧ dz̄ 2 ∧ dz 1 → e2πi/N dz̄ 1 ∧ dz̄ 2 ∧ dz 1 ,            dz̄ 1 ∧ dz̄ 2 ∧ dz 2 → e−2πi/N dz̄ 1 ∧ dz̄ 2 ∧ dz 2 ,
                                                                                                                             (B.14)

                                dz 1 ∧ dz 2 ∧ dz̄ 1 ∧ dz̄ 2 → dz 1 ∧ dz 2 ∧ dz̄ 1 ∧ dz̄ 2 .                                  (B.15)
This shows that the (0, 0) and (0, 2) forms are invariant under e
                                                                g but the two (0, 1) forms carry e
                                                                                                 g
eigenvalues e±2πi/N . Thus we have
                            (0,s)            1                        
                          c1        (−1) =     2 − e2πis/N − e−2πis/N                  for M = T 4 .                         (B.16)
                                             N
(B.13) also shows that e
                       g acts trivially on four of the 2-forms, and acts as a rotation by 4π/N in
the two dimensional subspace spanned by the other two 2-forms. By writing the 2-forms in the
real basis one can easily verify that the 2-forms which transform non-trivially under eg correspond to
left-handed 2-forms. This is one of the requirements on e g listed at the beginning of this appendix.
   Another useful set of results emerges by taking the z → 0 limit of eqs.(B.2) and (B.6). This gives
                                1
                                X            X             (r,s)                         1
                                                          cb       (4n − j 2 )e2πinτ =     Qr,s ,                            (B.17)
                                b=0 j∈2zz+b,n∈zz/N
                                                                                         N

where                                                               
                 Qr,s = T rRR;egr ges (−1)FL +FR e2πiτ L0 e−2πiτ̄ L̄0 ,                   0 ≤ r, s ≤ N − 1 .                 (B.18)
Qr,s is independent of τ and τ̄ since the (−1)FL +FR insertion in the trace makes the contribution from
the (L0 , L̄0 ) 6= (0, 0) states cancel. Thus (B.17) gives
                                       1
                                       X X            (r,s)                     1
                                                     cb        (4n − j 2 ) =      Qr,s δn,0 .                                (B.19)
                                       b=0 j∈2zz+b
                                                                                N

Setting n = 0 in the above equation and using eq.(B.9) we get
                                                             
                                            (r,s)      (r,s)
                                Qr,s = N c0 (0) + 2 c1 (−1) .                                                                (B.20)

                                                                   157
For r = 0, ı.e. in the untwisted sector, the trace in (B.18) reduces to a sum over the harmonic forms
of M. Since FL + FR + 2 is mapped to the degree of the harmonic form, Q0,s has the interpretation of
             g s over the even degree harmonic forms of M minus the trace of ges over the odd degree
the trace of e
harmonic forms of M. In particular we have

                                            Q0,0 = χ(M) ,                                                  (B.21)

where χ(M) denotes the Euler number of M.
   So far our definitions of various quantities have been somewhat abstract. For M = K3 and prime
values of N (N = 1, 2, 3, 5, 7) the functions F (r,s) (τ ) are known explicitly and are given by [11]
                          8
        F (0,0) (τ, z) =    A(τ, z) ,
                          N
                             8                     2
         F (0,s) (τ, z) =             A(τ, z) −        B(τ, z) EN (τ )   for 1 ≤ s ≤ (N − 1) ,
                          N(N + 1)               N +1
                                                                      
          (r,rk)             8                       2           τ +k
        F        (τ, z) =             A(τ, z) +            EN            B(τ, z) ,
                          N(N + 1)               N(N + 1)          N
                                              for 1 ≤ r ≤ (N − 1), 0 ≤ k ≤ (N − 1) ,
                                                                                                           (B.22)

where                                                                          
                                      ϑ2 (τ, z)2 ϑ3 (τ, z)2 ϑ4 (τ, z)2
                            A(τ, z) =           +          +                        ,                      (B.23)
                                      ϑ2 (τ, 0)2 ϑ3 (τ, 0)2 ϑ4 (τ, 0)2
                                      B(τ, z) = η(τ )−6 ϑ1 (τ, z)2 ,                                       (B.24)

and
                      12i                                     24              X
        EN (τ ) =            ∂τ [ln η(τ ) − ln η(Nτ )] = 1 +                            n1 e2πin1 n2 τ .   (B.25)
                    π(N − 1)                                 N −1         n1 ,n2 ≥1
                                                                         n1 6=0 mod N


On the other hand for M = T 4 the function F (r,s) (τ, z) are known for N = 2, 3 and are given by [7]

                                16         ϑ τ, z + s  ϑ τ, −z + s 
                 (0,s)                  4 πs     1        N      1            N
               F       (τ, z) =     sin                              2
                                N         N              ϑ1 τ, N   s

                                                     s     r
                                                                               s   r
                                                                                        
                                   4 N    ϑ 1 τ, z +    +    τ   ϑ  1  τ, −z +    +   τ
               F (r,s) (τ, z) =                      N     N
                                                                          2 N N ,
                                (N − 1)2                        s
                                                        ϑ1 τ, + τ      r
                                                                     N    N
                                      for 1 ≤ r ≤ N − 1, 0 ≤ s ≤ N − 1 .                                   (B.26)
                                                         (r,s)
Using these results we can compute the coefficients cb           (u) and Qr,s for these theories.


                                                   158
C       Siegel Modular Forms from Threshold Integrals
                                                                  e ρ, σ
In this section we shall prove various properties of the function Φ(e  e, e
                                                                          v) defined in (5.1.5) by relating
it to a ‘threshold integral’. These techniques were first developed in [250,251,252,253] and generalized
to the cases under study in [11].
    We begin by defining:                                                           
                                                                            ρ v
                                                             Ω=                          ,                                                 (C.1)
                                                                            v σ
and
                        1 2         1
                          pR =           | − m1 ρ + m2 + n1 σ + n2 (σρ − v 2 ) + jv|2 ,
                        2      4 det ImΩ
                        1 2    1 2                   1
                          pL =   pR + m1 n1 + m2 n2 + j 2 ,                                                                                (C.2)
                        2      2                     4
where ρ, σ and v are three complex variables. We now consider the ‘threshold integrals’
                                              N
                                              X −1 X
                                                   1                                             N
                                                                                                 X −1 X
                                                                                                      1
                             e σ, v) =
                             I(ρ,                           Ier,s,b ,               b σ, v) =
                                                                                    I(ρ,                       Ibr,s,b ,                   (C.3)
                                              r,s=0 b=0                                          r,s=0 b=0


where                                                                                                                               
                        Z                     X
                              d2 τ                             2           2                 (r,s)                        (0,s)
                                                                                                                                      
            Ier,s,b =              
                                                            q pL /2 q̄ pR /2 e2πim1 s/N hb           (τ ) − δb,0 δr,0 c0          (0)
                                                                                                                                      ,   (C.4)
                            F τ2       m1 ,m2 ,n2 ∈  zz
                                         zz
                                   n1 ∈ + N r
                                               ,j∈2   zz+b
and                                                                                                                                
                         Z                     X
                              d2 τ                                 2           2            (r,s)                     (0,s)
                                                                                                                                  
             Ibr,s,b =             
                                                              q pL /2 q̄ pR /2 e2πim2 s hb          (τ ) − δb,0 δr,0 c0       (0)
                                                                                                                                  ,       (C.5)
                            F τ2                zz    zz
                                       m1 ,n1 ∈ ,m2 ∈ /N
                                              zz
                                       n2 ∈N +r,j∈2 +b zz
with
                                                                 q ≡ e2πiτ .                                                               (C.6)

F denotes the fundamental region of SL(2, ZZ) in the upper half plane. The subtraction terms
                   (0,s)
proportional to c0 (0) have been chosen so that the integrand vanishes faster than 1/τ2 in the
τ → i∞ limit, rendering the integral finite. Let us now introduce another set of variables (e
                                                                                            ρ, σ
                                                                                               e, ve)
related to (ρ, σ, v) via the relations

                         1     1                                 v 2 − ρσ                                      v−ρ
                    ρe =              ,                     σ
                                                            e=N            ,                         v=
                                                                                                     e                 ,                   (C.7)
                         N 2v − ρ − σ                           2v − ρ − σ                                  2v − ρ − σ

                                                                        159
or equivalently,
                            e−e
                          ρeσ    v2                    v − 1)2
                                                  e − (e
                                                ρeσ                               e − ve2 + ve
                                                                                ρeσ
                     ρ=             ,      σ=                  ,           v=                  .       (C.8)
                             N ρe                    N ρe                            N ρe
We also define                                                    
                                                e=         ρe ve
                                                Ω                      .                               (C.9)
                                                           v σ
                                                           e  e
Then we have the relations:

                         (det ImΩ)−1 | − m1 ρ + m2 + n1 σ + n2 (σρ − v 2 ) + jv|2
                                 e −1 | − m′ ρe + m′ + n′ σ
                       = (det ImΩ)                               ′
                                                                   σ ρe − ve2 ) + j ′ e
                                                                                      v |2
                                            1      2    1 e + n2 (e
                                          1                        1
                         m1 n1 + m2 n2 + j 2 = m′1 n′1 + m′2 n′2 + j ′2                               (C.10)
                                          4                        4
where

         m′1 = m2 N,    m′2 = n1 ,      n′1 = n2 /N,       n′2 = m1 − n1 − j,      j ′ = −j − 2n1 .   (C.11)

Using these relations and relabeling the indices m1 , m2 , n1 , n2 in eqs.(C.4)-(C.5) one can easily prove
the relations
                                        b σ, v) = I(e
                                        I(ρ,          e ρ, σ
                                                           e, ve) .                                 (C.12)

In the same way one can show that under a transformation of the form

                                        Ω → (AΩ + B)(CΩ + D)−1 ,                                      (C.13)

b σ, v) remains invariant for the following choices of the matrices A, B, C, D:
I(ρ,
                                    
                     a   0   b   0
       A B           0 1 0 0
                 =  c 0 d 0 ,
                                            ad − bc = 1, c = 0 mod N, a, d = 1 mod N
       C D
                       0 0 0 1
                                       
                       0 1 0 0
       A B            −1 0 0 0 
                 =   0 0 0 1 ,
                                        
       C D
                         0 0 −1 0
                                      
                      1   0  0     µ
       A B           λ 1 µ 0 
                 =   0 0 1 −λ  ,
                                              λ, µ ∈ ZZ.
       C D
                        0 0 0 1
                                                                                                      (C.14)

                                                       160
The group of transformations generated by these matrices is a subgroup of the Siegel modular group
Sp(2, ZZ); we shall denote this subgroup by G.  b Via eq.(C.12) this also induces a group of symmetry
                    e ρ, σ
transformations of I(e                                         e
                         e, ve); we shall denote this group by G.
   We can now use the modular property of F (r,s) (τ, z) given in (B.8) to evaluate the integrals Ie
    b We refer the reader to [11] for detailed calculations in a specific example and quote here the
and I.
final results:
                                          
                 e σ, v) = −2 ln (det ImΩ)k − 2 ln Φ(ρ,
                 I(ρ,                              e σ, v) − 2 ln Φ(ρ,
                                                                  ē σ, v) + constant                                         (C.15)

and
                                          
                 I(ρ,                              b σ, v) − 2 ln Φ(ρ,
                 b σ, v) = −2 ln (det ImΩ)k − 2 ln Φ(ρ,           b̄ σ, v) + constant                                         (C.16)

where
                                                                  N −1
                                                         1 X (0,s)
                                                      k=       c (0) ,                                                        (C.17)
                                                         2 s=0 0

                  e σ, v) = e2πi(eαρ+eγ σ+v)
                  Φ(ρ,
                         Y1 NY−1           Y                                 PN−1
                                                                                s=0 e
                                                                                      −2πisl/N c(r,s) (4k ′ l−j 2 )
                                                                                                b
                                                             2πi(k ′ σ+lρ+jv)
                       ×                                  1−e
                                         r ,l∈zz,j∈2zz+b
                         b=0 r=0 k′ ∈zz+ N
                                      k′ ,l≥0,j<0 for k′ =l=0

                                                                                                                              (C.18)

and
                                b )
        b σ, v) = e2πi(αbρ+bγ σ+βv
        Φ(ρ,
                  Y1 N Y −1         Y                         n                           oPN−1
                                                                                            s=0 e
                                                                                                  −2πirs/N c(0,s) (4k ′ l−j 2 )
                                                                                                            b
                                                                  2πir/N 2πi(k ′ σ+lρ+jv)
                                                               1−e      e
                          b=0 r=0           zz     zz
                                      (k′ ,l)∈ ,j∈2 +b
                                    k′ ,l≥0,j<0 for k′ =l=0

                                                                                                                              (C.19)

                              N −1
                 1          1 X            e−2πis/N                                           1          1
             α
             e=     Q0,0 −         Q0,s                  ,                            γe =       Q0,0 =     χ(M),
                24N        2N s=1       (1 − e−2πis/N )2                                     24N        24N
                         1         1
             b = βb = b
             α        γ=    Q0,0 =    χ(M) .                                                                                  (C.20)
                         24        24
The quantities Qr,s have been given in terms of the coefficients c(r,s) (u) in (B.20). In arriving at
(C.18),(C.19) one needs to use the relations (B.10), (B.19), (B.21) and also (B.11), (B.16). Since

                                                                   161
   (0,s)
Nc0 (0) measures the number of harmonic (1, q)-forms weighted by (−1)q e     g s and summed over q,
the constant k defined in (C.17) has the interpretation of being half the number of e
                                                                                    g invariant (1, q)
forms weighted by (−1)q+1 and summer over q. Since both for K3 and T 4 the only e         g invariant
harmonic (1, q) forms are (1,1) forms (see eqs.(B.12)-(B.15)), k can be regarded as half the number
   g invariant harmonic (1,1) forms on M.
of e
    It follows from (C.12), (C.15) and (C.16) that

                             e ρ, σ
                             Φ(e  e, e                           b σ, v)
                                     v) = −(i)k C1 (2v − ρ − σ)k Φ(ρ,                            (C.21)

where C1 is a constant. The factor of −(i)k has been included to ensure that C1 is real and positive.
To see this we can consider the case where ρ, σ and v are all purely imaginary, with |v2 | << ρ2 , σ2 .
              b σ, v) defined in (C.19) is real and positive. On the other hand from (C.7) we get ρe
In this case Φ(ρ,
                                                                                PN −1 (0,s)
and σ e purely imaginary and e   v real. Eq.(C.18), together with the relation s=0   c1 (−1) = 2 then
              e ρ, σ
tells us that Φ(e  e, e
                      v) is real and negative. Hence in order to satisfy (C.21) we must have C1 real and
positive. The magnitude of C1 can be calculated by carefully evaluating the constants in eqs.(C.15),
(C.16) but we shall not do it here.
   Furthermore given the invariance of Ie and Ib under the groups G
                                                                  e and G,
                                                                        b it follows from eqs.(C.15),
(C.16) that
                                                                                     
              e                       −1                  k e                 A   B        e,
              Φ((AΩ + B)(CΩ + D) ) = det(CΩ + D) Φ(Ω)               for                   ∈G     (C.22)
                                                                              C   D
and                                                                                  
               b                                     b                        A   B        b.
               Φ((AΩ + B)(CΩ + D)−1 ) = det(CΩ + D)k Φ(Ω)           for                   ∈G     (C.23)
                                                                              C   D
In principle these transformation laws could have arbitrary phases but one can show that the phases
are trivial. Thus Φ e and Φb transform as modular forms of weight k under the groups G    e and G b
respectively. As special cases of (C.22), we have

                    e ρ + 1, σ
                    Φ(e               e ρ, σ
                             e, ve) = Φ(e  e + N, e    e ρ, σ
                                                  v) = Φ(e  e, e        e ρ, σ
                                                               v + 1) = Φ(e  e, e
                                                                                v) .             (C.24)

This also follows from (C.18) and the integrality of α
                                                     e and N γe. Integrality of N γe is manifest from
(C.20) and that of α
                   e has been argued below (5.2.12).
   From (C.18), (C.19), (B.19), (B.20), (B.11) and (B.16) it is easy to see that for small v

                                b σ, v) = −4π 2 v 2 g(ρ) g(σ) + O(v 4 )
                                Φ(ρ,                                                             (C.25)

                            e σ, v) = −4π 2 v 2 f1 (Nρ)f2 (σ/N) + O(v 4 ) ,
                            Φ(ρ,                                                                 (C.26)

                                                    162
where
                                                   ∞ N
                                                   Y Y −1
                                           2πib
                                              αρ
                                                                                         sr
                                  g(ρ) = e                      1 − e2πir/N e2πinρ             ,          (C.27)
                                                   n=1 r=0
                                                               ∞
                                                               Y
                                       f1 (Nρ) = e2πieαρ         (1 − e2πilρ )sl ,                        (C.28)
                                                               l=1
                                                        N
                                                        Y −1        Y                    ′
                                 f2 (σ/N) = e2πieγ σ                          (1 − e2πik σ )tr ,          (C.29)
                                                        r=0    k′ ∈   zz
                                                                       +r/N
                                                                    k′ >0

                          N −1
                        1 X −2πirs′ /N
                                               N
                                               X  −1                              
                                                            ′    (0,s′ )   (0,s′ )
                 sr =          e       Q0,s′ =       e−2πirs /N c0 (0) + 2c1 (−1) ,                       (C.30)
                        N ′                     ′
                          s =0                         s =0
                                     N −1        N −1                   
                                   1 X           X       (r,s)     (r,s)
                              tr =        Qr,s =        c0 (0) + 2c1 (−1) .                               (C.31)
                                   N s=0         s=0

                                                  v 2 + ve,
                                                e−e
Eq.(C.21) then gives, for small v, ı.e. small ρeσ

                         e ρ, σ
                         Φ(e     v ) = −4π 2 C1 (2v − ρ − σ)k v 2 g(ρ) g(σ) + O(v 4 ) .
                              e, e                                                                        (C.32)

Since Q0,s is the trace of (−1)p e
                                 g s over the harmonic p-forms of M, sr has the interpretation of being
the number of harmonic p-forms in M with ge eigenvalue e2πir/N weighted by (−1)p . Thus it is an
integer. On the other hand it follows from the definition (B.18) of Qr,s that br is the number of e   g
invariant, eg r twisted state. Thus it is also an integer.
   (f1 (N ρe))−1 computed from (C.28) coincides with the partition function (5.2.13) of a single Kaluza-
Klein monopole in the first description. Since this corresponds to an elementary twisted sector string
in the second description, we see that (f1 (τ ))−1 can be interpreted as the partition function of purely
electrically charged twisted sector states in the second description. On the other hand (f2 (eσ /N))−1
                                                                                              σ /N))−1
coincides with the l = 0 term in (5.2.36) with ve = 0. This leads to the conclusion that (f2 (e
can be interpreted as the partition function of the D1-D5 system in the absence of Kaluza-Klein
monopole, with arbitrary angular momentum, zero momentum along Se1 and zero momentum along
S 1 .49 Since in the second description this gets mapped to a purely magnetically charged half-BPS
state, we conclude that (f2 (τ ))−1 describes the partition function of purely magnetically charged
half-BPS states in the second description.
  49
     Note that in the absence of the Kaluza-Klein monopole the momentum along Se1 can no longer be identified with
angular momentum.



                                                              163
    Using
                                                
                                  a 0 b 0
                       A B        0 1 0 0
                               =                
                                   c 0 d 0  ⊂ G,
                                                     b
                       C D
                                    0 0 0 1
                       ad − bc = 1, a, b, c, d ∈ ZZ, a, d = 1 mod N,           c = 0 mod N ,     (C.33)

in (C.23), and eq.(C.25), one can show that

                                 g((aρ + b)(cρ + d)−1 ) = (cρ + d)k+2 g(ρ) .                     (C.34)

Thus g(ρ) transforms as a modular form of weight (k + 2) under Γ1 (N). The behaviour of g(ρ) for
large ρ2 is governed by the constant α
                                     b defined in (C.20).
    For M = K3 and prime values of N (N = 1, 2, 3, 5, 7) we can use (B.22) to find the explicit
expressions for g(τ ) and k [11]:
                                        g(τ ) = η(τ )k+2 η(Nτ )k+2 ,                             (C.35)
and
                                             24
                                              k=   − 2.                                          (C.36)
                                           N +1
On the other hand for M = T 4 and N = 2, 3 we get, using (B.26) [7],

                             g(τ ) = η(τ )2N (k+2)/(N −1) η(Nτ )−2(k+2)/(N −1) ,                 (C.37)

and
                                                    12
                                              k=        − 2.                                     (C.38)
                                                   N +1
   For M = K3 and N = 1, the function Φ     e constructed in this appendix is the well known weight
10 cusp form of the genus two Siegel modular group [254, 255, 256, 257]. For M = K3 and N = 2, 3
             e was found in [258, 259, 260]. A general discussion on construction of Siegel modular
the function Φ
                                                                               e can be found
forms can be found in [261]. Different ways of constructing the same functions Φ
in [262, 263, 10, 12].


D                          e
       Zeroes and Poles of Φ
In this appendix we shalll determine the zeroes and poles of the function Φ(e  e ρ, σ
                                                                                    e, e
                                                                                       v ) introduced in
appendix C. Via eq.(C.21) this also determines the zeroes and poles of the function Φ(ρ,  b σ, v). The
          e found in (C.26) and (C.32) will be special cases of the general set of zeroes we shall find.
zeroes of Φ

                                                    164
                                                                  e ρ, σ
   Using (C.3), (C.4), (C.15) we see that the Siegel modular form Φ(e  e, e
                                                                          v) satisfies the relation:

                      e ρ, σ
                −2 ln Φ(e     v) − 2 ln Φ(e
                           e, e            ē ρ, σ e, ev) − 2 k ln det ImΩe + constant
                Z 2 N     −1 1                                                          
                   d τ XX                   X                                         j2
              =                                          exp 2πiτ (m1 n1 + m2 n2 + ) ×
                 F τ2   r,s=0 b=0      m1 ,m2 ,n2 ∈zz,
                                                                                      4
                                    n1 ∈zz+ r ,j∈2zz+b
                                            N                                  
                        −πτ2                   2                              2               (r,s)
                  exp               σ ρe − ve ) + je
                                n2 (e                          e − m1 ρe + m2
                                                        v + n1 σ                  e2πim1 s/N hb (τ )
                         Ye
                            N
                            X −1             
                                   (0,s)
                         −       c0 (0) ,
                               s=0
                                                                                                        (D.1)

where                                                
                                     e=       σ
                                              e ev
                                     Ω                    ,         Ye = det ImΩ
                                                                               e.                       (D.2)
                                              ve ρe
Eq.(D.1) shows that the zeroes and poles of Φ        e appear only when the τ integral on the right hand
side of this equation diverges from the region near τ = i∞. Now, if we consider a term proportional
                                  (r,s)
to e2πinτ in the expansion of hb , then the τ1 dependent term in the integrand is of the form
                                        
exp 2πiτ1 (n + m1 n1 + m2 n2 + 14 j 2 ) . Since for large τ2 the τ1 integral runs from − 21 to 12 , it gives a
non-vanishing answer only if
                                                               j2
                                        n + m1 n1 + m2 n2 +        = 0.                                 (D.3)
                                                                4
Thus after performing the τ1 integral, the only τ2 dependence of the integrand in the large τ2 region
comes from the                                                                   
                                 πτ2                 2                          2
                          exp −              σ ρe − e
                                         n2 (e      v ) + je      e − ρem1 + m2
                                                           v + n1 σ                                     (D.4)
                                  Ye
factor. As long as the coefficient of τ2 in the exponent is non-zero the integrand is exponentially
suppressed for large τ2 and as a result the integral is convergent. Thus the only way the integral can
diverge from the large τ2 region is if this vanishes:

                                    σ ρe − ve2 ) + je
                                n2 (e                      e − ρem1 + m2 = 0 ,
                                                    v + n1 σ                                            (D.5)

for some m1 , m2 , n1 , n2 , j appearing in the sum in (D.1).
    Now we have the identity

                                                              j2  1
                                     m1 n1 + m2 n2 +             = (p2L − p2R ) ,                       (D.6)
                                                              4   2

                                                              165
where
                 1                                                         2
        p2R =            σ ρe − ve2 ) + je
                     n2 (e                 v + n1 σ  e − ρem1 + m2 ,
                2Ye
                 1                                                                            2
        p2L   =       m2 + n2 (e   σ2 ρe2 + σ e1 ρe1 − ev12 − e
                                                              v22 ) − m1 ρe1 + n1 σ  e1 + je
                                                                                           v1
                2Ye
                                                                                                           2
                   1                                           2e v22 ρe1                         2ev22
                +        n2 σ  e1 ρe1 − σ e1 ρe2 + 2e    v2 −
                                                      v1 e                   + m1 ρe2 + n1 σ e2 −         − je
                                                                                                             v2
                  2Ye                                              ρe2                             ρe2
                                                           2
                      j        v2
                               e                     v2 ρe1
                                                     e
                +2      + n1 − n2 ve1 + n2                      .                                                     (D.7)
                      2        ρe2                     ρe2
Since p2L is positive semi-definite, and since p2R vanishes when (D.5) holds, (D.6) shows that we must
have
                                                      j2
                                                         ≥ 0.
                                                  m1 n1 + m2 n2 +                                 (D.8)
                                                      4
Furthermore the equality sign holds only when p2L also vanishes. This requires m1 = m2 = n1 =
n2 = j = 0. The corresponding divergence is present for all σ
                                                            e, ρe, ve and is removed by the subtraction
                     P (0,s)
term proportional to s c0 (0) in (D.1). Thus the divergences which depend on σ       e, ρe, e
                                                                                            v come from
those values of mi , ni , j which satisfy (D.5) and for which
                                                                  j2
                                                  m1 n1 + m2 n2 +    > 0.                                             (D.9)
                                                                  4
This, together with eq.(D.3), now show that we must have

                                                            n < 0.                                                   (D.10)
                                                                      (r,s)
In other words the only terms in the expansion of hb responsible for a divergent contribution to
the integral (D.1) are the ones involving negative powers of e2πiτ . Eqs.(B.4), (B.9) now imply that
                                                                                (r,s)                      (r,s)
the divergent contribution comes from terms proportional to c1 (−1) for all N, and c1 (−1 + 4p    N
                                                                                                    )
                                                                                  p
(p ∈ ZZ, N4 > p ≥ 1) for N ≥ 5. The corresponding values of n are − 41 and − 14 + N respectively.
                                                          (r,s)
   First consider the contribution from the c1                    (−1) term. Putting n = −1/4 in (D.3) we get
                                                                       j2  1
                                                  m1 n1 + m2 n2 +         = .                                        (D.11)
                                                                       4   4
By estimating the τ2 integral in the right hand side of (D.1) for n2 (e    v 2 )+je
                                                                      σ ρe−e            e − ρem1 +m2 ≃ 0,
                                                                                  v +n1 σ
one easily finds that the divergent contribution is given by
                    N
                    X −1
                                       (r,s)                                                       2
               −2          e2πim1 s/N c1       (−1) ln n2 (e      v 2 ) + je
                                                           σ ρe − e               e − ρem1 + m2
                                                                           v + n1 σ                    ,
                     s=0
                                                                  r = n1 N mod N, j = 1 mod 2 ,                      (D.12)

                                                              166
where we have included a factor of 2 due to the fact that the lattice vectors (m,             ~ −~n, −j)
                                                                               ~ ~n, j) and (−m,
give identical divergent contribution. Comparing this with the left-hand side of (D.1) we see that
                 e behaves as
near this region Φ
                                                                               PN−1
                                                                                 s=0 e
                                                                                       2πim1 s/N c(r,s) (−1)
                   e ∼ n2 (e
                   Φ              v 2 ) + je
                           σ ρe − e               e − ρem1 + m2
                                           v + n1 σ                                               1
                                                                                                               ,
                                                                            r                              j2  1
                   m1 , m2 , n2 ∈ ZZ,          j ∈ 2 ZZ + 1,       n1 ∈ ZZ + ,             m1 n1 + m2 n2 +    = .
                                                                            N                              4   4
                                                                                                                             (D.13)
                                                                                                    (r,s)
   For N ≥ 5 we also have divergent contribution to (D.1) from the c1                                       (−1 + 4p
                                                                                                                  N
                                                                                                                     ) term. In this
case (D.3) gives
                                                  j2  1   p
                                  m1 n1 + m2 n2 +    = − .                                                                   (D.14)
                                                  4   4 N
The divergent contribution takes the form
                   N
                   X −1
                                      (r,s)           4p                                              2
              −2          e2πim1 s/N c1       (−1 +      ) ln n2 (e      v 2 ) + je
                                                                  σ ρe − e               e − ρem1 + m2 ,
                                                                                  v + n1 σ
                   s=0
                                                      N
                                                                           r = n1 N mod N, j = 1 mod 2 .                     (D.15)

     e behaves as
Thus Φ
                                                                          PN−1
                                                                            s=0 e
                                                                                  2πim1 s/N c(r,s) (−1+ 4p )
              e ∼ n2 (e
              Φ              v 2 ) + je
                      σ ρe − e               e − ρem1 + m2
                                      v + n1 σ                                               1
                                                                                                       ,N


                                                                               r                       j2  1 p
              m1 , m2 , n2 ∈ ZZ,          j ∈ 2 ZZ + 1,          n1 ∈ ZZ +       ,     m1 n1 + m2 n2 +    = − .
                                                                               N                       4   4 N
                                                                                                                             (D.16)

   From (B.2), (B.6) it follows that the exponent in (D.13) has the interpretation as the number of
 r
                      g eigenvalue e−2πim1 /N , FL = 1 (or FL = −1) and L0 = L̄0 = 0, weighted by
g twisted states with e
e
(−1)FL +FR . On the other hand the exponent in (D.16) has the interpretation as the number of egr
                    g eigenvalue e−2πim1 /N , FL = 1 (or FL = −1), L0 = p/N and L̄0 = 0, weighted
twisted states with e
by (−1)FL +FR . Thus both numbers are integers.
   For the analysis in §5.6 we need to know which exponents are positive, corresponding to the
          e and which exponents are negative, corresponding to the poles of Φ.
zeroes of Φ,                                                                e First consider the
case r = 0, ı.e. n1 ∈ ZZ. In this case using eqs.(B.11) we see that the exponent in (D.13) for M = K3
is given by
                                    N
                                    X −1                                  n
                                                         (0,s)                2 for m1 ∈ N ZZ
                                           e2πim1 s/N c1         (−1) =                       .                              (D.17)
                                     s=0
                                                                              0 otherwise

                                                                   167
On the other hand using eq.(B.16) we see that for M = T 4 the exponent in (D.13) for M = T 4 is
given by                                         (
                        N
                        X −1                       2 for m1 ∈ N ZZ
                                         (0,s)
                             e2πim1 s/N c1 (−1) = −1 for m1 ∈ N ZZ ± 1 .                (D.18)
                        s=0                        0 otherwise
In the special case of N = 2, the sets N ZZ ± 1 coincide, and the exponent becomes equal to −2
instead of −1 for m1 ∈ N ZZ ± 1.
    Since for r = 0, m1 , n1 , m2 , n2 ∈ ZZ, and j ∈ 2 ZZ + 1, the only way to satisfy (D.14) is to take
p = 0. Thus there are no zeroes or poles of the type given in (D.16) with p 6= 0.
   The zeroes and poles originating in the r 6= 0 mod N sector are more difficult to evaluate since
these require counting twisted sector states with specific e
                                                           g quantum numbers. However one can
                                                                            (r,s)
extract some general information by noting that since the coefficients cb (4n) do not depend on
the shape and size of M, we can compute them by taking the size of M to be large so that near
                   g the orbifold can be regarded as that of R4 . Thus the contribution from a given
any fixed point of e
twisted sector associated with a given fixed point can be computed in a free super-conformal field
theory. Locally the action of ge may be represented as rotation by 2π/N in one two dimensional plane
and rotation by −2π/N in an orthogonal two dimensional plane. Thus in a twisted RR sector, all
the bosons and fermions will be twisted and there are no zero modes. As a result the ground state
with L0 = L̄0 = 0 is unique, carrying FL = FR = 0. Even after we apply left-moving oscillators to
create excited BPS states, these states will continue to have FR = 0. Now since the computation
of the exponents in (D.13), (D.16) involves counting BPS states with FL = 1 (or −1), the weight
factor (−1)FL +FR is given by −(−1)FR = −1 for each of these states. Thus the exponents in (D.13)
                                                                             e rather than zeroes.
or (D.16) are always negative for r 6= 0 mod N. These correspond to poles of Φ
   The net conclusion of this analysis is that both for M = K3 and M = T 4 , the only zeroes of
e ρ, σ
Φ(e  e, e
        v ) are of the form:
                                                               2
                  Φe ∼ n2 (e      v 2 ) + je
                           σ ρe − e               e − ρem1 + m2 ,
                                           v + n1 σ
                                                                               j2  1
                   m1 ∈ N ZZ, n1 , m2 , n2 ∈ ZZ, j ∈ 2 ZZ + 1, m1 n1 + m2 n2 +    = .
                                                                               4   4
                                                                                        (D.19)

The rest are poles.
   For M = K3 and prime values of N (N = 1, 2, 3, 5, 7) we can use eq.(B.22) to explicitly compute
the exponents appearing in (D.13) and (D.16). We get [6]
                 N
                 X −1                           n
                        2πim1 s/N    (r,s)          2 for r = 0 mod N, m1 = 0 mod N
                        e           c1 (−1) =                                       ,            (D.20)
                  s=0
                                                    0 otherwise

                                                       168
              N
              X −1                                       
                      2πim1 s/N    (r,s)       4             −48/(N 2 − 1) for m1 r = −1 mod N .
                     e            c1 (−1 +       )=                                                (D.21)
              s=0
                                               N             0 otherwise
For M = T 4 and N = 2, 3 we can use eq.(B.26) to explicitly compute the exponents appearing in
(D.13) and (D.16). The result is [7]
                                                   (
              N
              X −1                                     2 for r = 0 mod N, m1 = 0 mod N
                                  (r,s)
                     e2πim1 s/N c1        (−1) =       − N 2−1 for r = 0 mod N, m1 = ±1 mod N .    (D.22)
              s=0                                      0 otherwise

E     The Case of Multiple D5 branes
In this appendix we extend the counting of states associated with the relative motion of the D1-D5
system to the case when the number of D5-branes is Q5 ≥ 1. We shall restrict our analysis to the
case when M = K3 and follow the analysis given in [6].
    We shall choose the world-volume space coordinate σ along each of the D1-branes to coincide
with the coordinate along S 1 . Due to the ZZN orbifolding each D1-brane satisfies a twisted boundary
condition, – under σ → σ + 2π its location along K3 must get transformed by ge. We shall first ignore
the effect of this twist and pretend that the D1-brane satisfies periodic boundary condition under
σ → σ + 2π, and later take into account the effect of the twist.
   The dynamics of the relative motion of Q5 D5-branes wrapped on K3 × S 1 and Q1 D1-branes
wrapped on S 1 is captured by the N = (4, 4) superconformal σ-model with the symmetric product
of W = Q5 (Q1 − Q5 ) + 1 copies of K3 as the target space as long as Q5 and Q1 do not have a
common factor [264]. We shall denote this target space by S W K3 ≡ (K3)W /SW , where SW refers to
the permutation group of W elements. The world-sheet coordinate σ of this conformal field theory is
identified with the coordinate along S 1 . We shall first review various aspects of the superconformal
field theory with target space (K3)W /SW [163], and then discuss the effect of the ZZN twist that is
required to describe a D1-D5-brane configuration on the CHL orbifold.
   Let g be an element of SW and [g] denote the conjugacy class of g. Then the Hilbert space of the
SCFT with target space (K3)W /SW decomposes into a direct sum of twisted sectors labelled by the
conjugacy classes of SW :
                                                        H = ⊕[g] Hg(Cg )                            (E.1)
                                                           (C )
where Cg denotes the centralizer of [g] and Hg g refers to the Hilbert space in the g twisted sector
projected by Cg . The conjugacy classes of SW may be labelled as

                                               [g] = (1)P1 (2)P2 · · · (s)Ps                        (E.2)

                                                              169
where (w) denotes cyclic permutation of w elements and Pw is the number of copies of (w) in g.
Thus these conjugacy classes are characterized by partitions Pw of W such that
                                          X
                                              wPw = W .                                  (E.3)
                                              w

The centralizer Cg of the conjugacy class [g] given in (E.2) is given by

                           Cg = SP1 × (SP2 × ZZP2 2 ) × · · · × (SPs × ZZPs s ) .               (E.4)

Let us denote by Hw the Hilbert space of states twisted by the generator ω of the ZZw group of cyclic
permutation of w elements, and projected by the same ZZw group. Then (E.4) shows that for the
conjugacy class [g] given in (E.2)
                                         Hg(Cg ) = ⊗w>0 S Pw Hw                                 (E.5)

   Consider first the Hilbert space Hw . This twisted sector is represented by the Hilbert space of
the sigma model of w coordinate fields Xi (σ) ∈ K3 with the cyclic boundary condition

                         Xi (σ + 2π) = ωXi (σ) = Xi+1 (σ),        i ∈ (1, . . . , w) ,          (E.6)

where ω acts by ω : Xi → Xi+1 . Therefore the w coordinate fields can be glued together as a single
field but in the interval 0 ≤ σ ≤ 2πw, moving in the target space K3. Thus we now have a string of
length 2πw, – commonly known as the long string, – moving in K3. Whereas for Q5 = 1 the quantum
number w can be identified with the winding charge of the D-string, this is not so for Q5 > 1. Thus
we should not regard the long string as a D-string, – rather it provides some effective description of
the dynamics.
   Once we know the spectrum of Hw , – which can be found from the spectrum of an SCFT with
target space K3 after a rescaling of the L0 and L̄0 eigenvalues by 1/w to take into account the effect
of the length of the string, – the full spectrum of the CFT of the D1-D5 system is obtained by
taking the direct product of the spectrum of Hw ’s and then carrying out appropriate symmetrization
described in (E.5).
   We now turn to the effect of the ZZN twisted boundary condition that is required in order
to get a state of the D1-D5 system in the ZZN CHL model. For this we need to change (E.6)
to Xi (σ + 2π) = geXi+1 (σ). Thus effectively we modify the generator of ZZw by an additional e
                                                                                              g
transformation leaving unchanged the rest of the analysis. Since the long string has length 2πw, as
we go once around the long string the boundary condition is twisted by e gw = eg r where r = w mod
N. Let us denote by Hw′ the Hilbert space of states of the long string with e
                                                                            g r twisted boundary

                                                   170
condition, and projected by the new ZZw group. Then the full Hilbert space of the D1-D5 system
will be obtained simply by replacing Hw by Hw′ in (E.5):

                                                         ⊗w>0 S Pw Hw′ .                                                         (E.7)

Clearly Hw′ can be identified with the Hilbert space of e
                                                        g r twisted states in the SCFT described in
appendix B. Since the string has length 2πw, a physical momentum −l/N along S 1 would correspond
to L0 − L̄0 eigenvalue of lw/N in this SCFT. Since supersymmetry requires L̄0 to vanish, we have
L0 = lw/N. Let FL denote the left-moving world-sheet fermion number of this SCFT. By the
standard argument, the presence of Kaluza-Klein monopole background converts FL eigenvalues into
momenta along Se1 . Since the projection operator for ZZN invariant states with physical momentum
−l/N along S 1 is
                                                        1 X −2πils/N s
                                                            e       g ,
                                                                    e                                                            (E.8)
                                                        N s
the total number of bosonic minus fermionic states in the single long string Hilbert space, carrying
momentum −l/N along S 1 and momentum j along Se1 is given by:
                                         1 X −2πils/N
                          n(w, l, j) =       e                   g s (−1)FL +FR δN L0 ,lw δFL ,j ) .
                                                      T rRR;egr (e                                                               (E.9)
                                         N s

Using (5.2.32) this may be written as
                                           X                (r,s)
                            n(w, l, j) =        e−2πils/N cb        (4lw/N − j 2 ),      b = j mod 2 .                          (E.10)
                                            s

   According to (E.7) the next step is the evaluation of the partition function for the symmetrized
tensor products of the Hilbert spaces Hw′ . For this we use the following formula from [163]. If
dsym (Pw , w, L, J ′ ) denotes the number of bosonic minus fermionic states in S Pw Hw′ carrying total
momentum −L/N along S 1 and total momentum J ′ along Se1 , then
    ∞ X
    X                                                                    Y
                                                    ′                                                          −n(w,l,j)
                  dsym (Pw , w, L, J ′)e2πiLeρ+2πiJ ve+2πieσPw /N =              1 − e2πieσ/N +2πileρ+2πijev                .   (E.11)
    Pw =0 L,J ′                                                         l,j∈zz
                                                                          l≥0



   Using the identity in (E.11) we can evaluate the generating function for the bosonic minus
fermionic states for the relative dynamics of the D1-D5 system. Eq.(E.7) shows that all we need to
do is to take the product over w of the right hand side of (E.11). More specifically, if dD1D5 (W, L, J ′ )
denotes the total number of bosonic minus fermionic states carrying total string length 2πW =


                                                               171
  P
2π w>0 wPw (counting a single long string with quantum number w to have length 2πw), total
momentum −L/N along S 1 and total momentum J ′ along Se1 , then we have
                    X                                                      ′
                             dD1D5 (W, L, J ′ )e2πi(eρL+eσW/N +evJ )
                   W,L,J ′
                       Y Y                                        −n(w,l,j)
                   =                  1 − e2πieσw/N +2πileρ+2πijev
                       w∈zz l,j∈zz
                       w>0     l≥0

                       N
                       Y −1 Y
                            1               Y                                              PN−1              (r,s)
                                                                           ′                      e−2πisl/N cb       (4k ′ l−j 2 )
                   =                                          (1 − e2πi(k σe+leρ+jev) )−    s=0                                      .
                       r=0 b=0 k′ ∈zz+ N
                                       r ,l∈zz,j∈2zz+b
                                          k′ >0,l≥0

                                                                                                                                         (E.12)

In arriving at the last expression in (E.12) we have defined k ′ = w/N. Physically dD1D5 (W, L, J ′ )
counts the number of states with fixed number Q1 and Q5 of D1 and D5-branes, and fixed momenta
−L/N and J ′ along S 1 and Se1 , with W identified with the number Q5 (Q1 − Q5 ) + 1. Eq.(E.12)
replaces (5.2.36) for general Q5 , and reduces to (5.2.36) for Q5 = 1. Subsequent analysis leading to
the full partition function of the system proceeds in a manner identical to the one described in §5.2.4
                           ~ P~ ) has the form of (5.2.41) with P 2 given by 2(W − 1) = 2Q5 (Q1 − Q5 ).
and the final result for d(Q,


F     Riemann Normal Coordinates and Duality Invariant Sta-
      tistical Entropy Function
In section 5.6 we considered ~η = ~τ − ~τB for some fixed base point ~τB as the fundamental field in
                   ~ and ΓB (~τB , χ
defining WB (~τB , J)              ~ ). In this appendix we shall try to generalize this by treating

                                                                 ξ~ = ~g (~η)                                                             (F.1)

as a fundamental field. Here ~g (~η ) is an arbitrary function of ~η with a Taylor series expansion starting
with the linear terms (ı.e. ~g (~0) = ~0). In this case the generating function of ξ~ correlation functions
will be given by                                          Z
                                       fB (~
                                       W       ~
                                           τB ,J)                 d2 η                    ~
                                      e               =                   2
                                                                            e−F (~τB +~η)+J·~g(~η) .                                      (F.2)
                                                              (τB2 + η2 )
          fB (~τB , ~0) = Sstat . The corresponding effective action is defined via the equations
As before W

                                      fB (~τB , J)
                                     ∂W         ~
                             ψi =                  ,             Γ         ~ = J~ · ψ
                                                                 eB (~τB , ψ)       ~−W
                                                                                      fB (~τB , J)
                                                                                                ~ .                                       (F.3)
                                        ∂Ji

                                                                    172
From this it follows that
                                                                                   ~
                                                                         eB (~τB , ψ)
                                                                        ∂Γ
                                                                Ji =                  .                                                  (F.4)
                                                                           ∂ψi
Now suppose ~τ (0) is a specific value of ~τB for which

                                    ∂Γ            ~
                                     eB (~τ (0) , ψ)                             fB (~τ (0) , J)
                                                                                ∂W            ~
                                                         = 0 ı.e.                                    = 0.                                (F.5)
                                        ∂ψi          ~
                                                     ψ=0                           ∂Ji           ~
                                                                                                 J=0

                                ~ = 0, and hence
In this case we have J~ = 0 for ψ

                                                 eB (~τ (0) , ~0) = −W
                                                 Γ                   fB (~τ (0) , ~0) = −Sstat .                                         (F.6)

                          eB (~τB , ~0), regarded as a function of ~τB , has an extremum at ~τB = ~τ (0) .
   We shall now show that Γ
From (F.3), (F.4) we see that
                                                                                                  
                            eB (~τ (0) + ~ǫ, ~0) = −W
                            Γ                       fB ~τ (0) + ~ǫ, J~ = ∂ Γ                ~ ψ
                                                                           eB (~τ (0) + ~ǫ, ψ)/∂ ~                      .                (F.7)
                                                                                                                 ~ ~0
                                                                                                                 ψ=

Now
                            Z                                                        Z
       fB (~
       W          ~
           τB +~ǫ,J)                  d2 η                          ~                         d2 η                    ~
      e                 =                        2
                                                   e−F (~τB +~ǫ+~η)+J·~g(~η ) =                       2
                                                                                                        e−F (~τB +~η)+J·~g(~η−~ǫ) ,      (F.8)
                                (τB2 + ǫ2 + η2 )                                          (τB2 + η2 )

where in the second step we have made a change of variables ~η → ~η −~ǫ. Since g(~η −~ǫ) = g(~η) + O(~ǫ),
this shows that
                              fB (~τB + ~ǫ, J)
                              W             ~ =W
                                               fB (~τB , J)
                                                         ~ + O(ǫi Jk ) .                           (F.9)

Using this information in (F.7) we get
                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                e     (0)    ~
  e B (~τ
  Γ         (0)                fB (~τ
                  + ~ǫ, ~0) = −W        (0)
                                              , J~ = ∂ Γ
                                                       eB (~τ   (0)         ~ ψ)|
                                                                      + ~ǫ, ψ)/∂ ~ ~ ~ + O ǫi ∂ ΓB (~τ + ~ǫ, ψ)                       . (F.10)
                                                                                   ψ=0
                                                                                                      ∂ψj       ~
                                                                                                                ψ=0


Eq.(F.5) now shows that the second term on the right hand side of this equation is of order ǫ2 , and J~
appearing in the argument of the first term is of order ǫ. Expanding the first term in a Taylor series
              ~ and noting that the linear term vanishes due to (F.5), we get
expansion in J,

                          eB (~τ (0) + ~ǫ, ~0) = −W
                          Γ                       fB (~τ (0) , J~ = ~0) + O(ǫ2 ) = Γ
                                                                                   eB (~τ (0) , ~0) + O(ǫ2 ) .                          (F.11)

Thus
                                                       eB (~τ , ~0)
                                                      ∂Γ
                                                                    = 0 at ~τ = ~τ (0) .                                                (F.12)
                                                         ∂τi

                                                                          173
Using (F.6) and (F.12) we see that the statistical entropy is given by the value of −Γ   eB (~τ , ~0) at its
extremum ~τ = ~τ (0) . Thus we can identify −ΓeB (~τ , ~0) as the statistical entropy function. This is
computed as the sum of 1PI vacuum amplitudes in the theory with ξi regarded as the fundamental
fields.
    We shall now show that for a suitable choice of the coordinates ξ, ~ the statistical entropy function
−Γ eB (~τ , ~0) defined this way can be made manifestly duality invariant. This is done by choosing ξ~ as
Riemann normal coordinates. For a given base point ~τB the coordinate ξ~ for a given point ~τ in the
upper half plane is defined as follows. We introduce the duality invariant metric on the upper half
plane
                                               ds2 = (τ2 )−2 (dτ12 + dτ22 ) ,                                     (F.13)
and draw a geodesic connecting ~τB and ~τ . The coordinate ξ~ corresponding to the point ~τ is then
                        ~ as the distance between ~τB and ~τ along the geodesic and the direction of ξ~
defined by identifying |ξ|
is taken to be the direction of the tangent vector to the geodesic at ~τB .50 Since the metric (F.13) is
invariant under a duality transformation, it is clear that if a duality transformation maps ~τB to ~τB′
and ~τ to ~τ ′ , then the Riemann normal coordinate ξ~′ of ~τ ′ with respect to ~τB′ will have the property
that |ξ~′| = |ξ|.
                ~ Thus ξ~ and ξ~′ are related by a rotation. In order to determine the angle of rotation,
we note that under a duality transformation (5.6.45),

                                                  dτ ′ = (γτ + δ)−2 dτ .                                          (F.14)

Thus
                                                 dτ ′     |γτ + δ|2 dτ
                                                        =                 .                                       (F.15)
                                                |dτ ′ |   (γτ + δ)2 |dτ |
This shows that a geodesic passing through τB gets rotated by a phase |γτB + δ|2 /(γτB + δ)2 under
a duality transformation. Hence

                                           ′ |γτB + δ|2     γ τ̄B + δ
                                         ξ =           2
                                                         ξ=           ξ,                                          (F.16)
                                             (γτB + δ)      γτB + δ
where
                                          ξ = ξ1 + iξ2 ,          ξ ′ = ξ1′ + iξ2′ .                              (F.17)

   Since for given τB the duality transformation acts linearly on ξ,~ the corresponding generating
         fB (~τB , J)
function W         ~ and the effective action Γ         ~ will be manifestly duality invariant under
                                              eB (~τB , ψ)
  50
                                                                             p
    Often one uses the convention that the distance along the geodesic is gij (~τB )ξ i ξ j . This definition differs from
the one used here by a multiplicative factor of τ2B . Since this transforms covariantly under a duality transformation,
both choices of ξ~ would give manifestly covariant Feynman rules.

                                                            174
simultaneous transformation of ~τB , J~ or ψ ~ and of course the charges Q~ and P~ . In particular the 1PI
vacuum amplitude Γ eB (~τ , ~0) will be invariant under the duality transformation (5.6.45).
    We shall now give an algorithm for explicitly generating duality covariant vertices in this 0-
dimensional field theory. For this we need to expand the duality invariant function F (~τ ) in a Taylor
                    ~ This is given by:
series expansion in ξ.
                                      ∞
                                      X 1
                          F (~τ ) =            (τB2 )n ξi1 . . . ξin Di1 · · · Din F (~τ )           ,   (F.18)
                                      n=0
                                          n!                                                 ~
                                                                                             τ =~
                                                                                                τB


where Di denotes covariant derivative with respect to τi , computed using the affine connection Γijk
constructed from the metric (F.13). We arrive at (F.18) by using the result that in the ξ~ coordinate
system symmetrized covariant derivatives are equal to ordinary derivatives. Using this we can replace
ordinary derivatives in the Taylor series expansion by covariant derivatives with respect to ξi . In
the second step we use the tensorial transformation properties of covariant derivatives to convert
covariant derivative with respect to ξi to covariant derivative with respect to τi . The (τB2 )n factor
in (F.18) arises due to the fact that near ~τ = ~τB ,

                                                     dτi = τB2 dξi .                                     (F.19)

   In the (τ, τ̄ ) coordinate system the non-zero components of the connection are
                                                       i                         i
                                          Γττ τ =        ,       Γτ̄τ̄ τ̄ = −      .                     (F.20)
                                                      τ2                        τ2
The curvature tensor computed from this connection has the form

                                           Ri jkl = −(δki gjl − δli gjk ) ,                              (F.21)

which shows that the metric (F.13) describes a constant negative curvature metric. From (F.20) it
follows that

                           Dτ (Dτm Dτ̄n F (~τ )) = (∂τ − im/τ2 )(Dτm Dτ̄n F (~τ )),
                           Dτ̄ (Dτm Dτ̄n F (~τ )) = (∂τ̄ + in/τ2 )(Dτm Dτ̄n F (~τ )) ,                   (F.22)

for any arbitrary ordering of Dτ and Dτ̄ in Dτm Dτ̄n F (~τ ). (F.22) provides us with explicit expressions
for the covariant derivatives of F appearing in (F.18). Also using (F.22) one can prove iteratively
that under a duality transformation
                                                          m−n
                           m+n  m n               γτ + δ
                     (τ2 )     Dτ Dτ̄ F (~τ ) →                 (τ2 )m+n Dτm Dτ̄n F (~τ ) . (F.23)
                                                  γ τ̄ + δ

                                                             175
This establishes manifest duality covariance of the vertices constructed from (F.18).
    We also need to worry about the contribution from the integration measure. The original measure
d τ /(τ2 )2 was duality invariant. Since duality transformation acts on ξ~ as a rotation, d2 ξ is also a
 2

duality invariant measure. Thus we must have

                                           d2 τ             ~ d2 ξ ,
                                                 = J (~τB , ξ)                                    (F.24)
                                          (τ2 )2

                                             ~ It has been shown in appendix G that
for some duality invariant function J (~τB , ξ).

                                                  ~ = 1 sinh |ξ|
                                         J (~τB , ξ)          ~ .                                 (F.25)
                                                       ~
                                                      |ξ|

                                ~ as an additional contribution to the action and expand this in a
We can now regard − ln J (~τB , ξ)
power series expansion in ξ~ to generate additional vertices. Using the expression for F (~τ ) given in
(5.6.44) we now see that the full ‘action’ is given by
                                      
                                 ~ = − π |Q − τ P |2 − ln g(τ ) − ln g(−τ̄ ) − (k + 2) ln(2τ2 )
           F (~τ ) − ln J (~τB , ξ)
                                        2τ2
                                         n π                o
                                                                       ~
                                     + ln K0 |Q − τ P |2 + ln J (~τB , ξ)
                                              τ2
                                                           
                                                 2(k + 3)τ2
                                     + ln 1 +                  .
                                               π|Q − τ P |2
                                                                                                  (F.26)

In this expression the first term inside the square bracket is quadratic in the charges, the last term
contains terms of order Q−2n for n ≥ 1, and the other terms are of order Q0 . Thus in order to carry
out a systematic expansion in powers of inverse charges we need to regard the first term as the tree
level contribution, the last term as two and higher loop contributions and the other terms as the
1-loop contribution.
    We can now evaluate the effective action ΓeB (~τB ) in a systematic loop expansion. The leading
term in the effective action is then just the first term in (F.26) evaluated at ~τ = ~τB :

                                      e 0 (~τB ) = − π |Q − τB P |2 .
                                      Γ                                                           (F.27)
                                                    2τ2B
At the next order we need to include the tree level contribution from the rest of the terms in the
action (except the last term which is higher order) and one loop contribution from the first term.



                                                    176
The former corresponds to these terms being evaluated at ~τ = ~τB , ı.e. ξ~ = 0. Since J (~τB , ξ~ = 0) = 1,
we get this contribution to be
                                                                  n    π              o
                  ln g(τB ) + ln g(−τ̄B ) + (k + 2) ln(2τ2B ) − ln K0     |Q − τB P |2 .              (F.28)
                                                                      τ2B
For the one loop contribution from the first term in the action we need to expand this term to
quadratic order in ξ~ using eqs.(F.18), (F.22). The order ξ~ and ξ 2 terms are given by
                          iπ  ¯                                π                ¯ .
                     −        ξ(Q − τB P )2 + ξ(Q − τ̄B P )2 −      |Q − τB P |2 ξξ                  (F.29)
                         4τ2B                                  4τ2B

The linear term in ξ~ do not give any contribution to the 1PI amplitudes. The contribution from the
quadratic term gives                                                  
                                                    1
                                          ln            |Q − τB P |2       .                         (F.30)
                                                   4τ2B
Thus the complete one loop contribution to the effective action is given by

                     e1 (~τB ) = ln g(τB ) + ln g(−τ̄B ) + (k + 2) ln(2τ2B ) − ln(4πK0 ) .
                     Γ                                                                               (F.31)

Up to an additive constant −Γ    e0 (~τB ) − Γ
                                             e1 (~τB ) agrees with the black hole entropy function given in
(3.1.40), (3.1.47) if we identify τB as ua + iuS .


G                                       ~
       The Integration Measure J (~τB , ξ)
                                                                   ~ which arises from a change of
In this appendix we shall compute the integration measure J (~τB , ξ)
variables from τ1 , τ2 to the Riemann normal coordinates:

                                            d2 τ             ~ d2 ξ .
                                                  = J (~τB , ξ)                                       (G.1)
                                           (τ2 )2

We first note that the duality invariant metric
                                                    1
                                                      (dτ 2 + dτ22 )                                  (G.2)
                                                   τ22 1

                                                                                                  ~
describes a metric of constant negative curvature −1. Since this is a homogeneous space, J (~τB , ξ)
cannot depend on ~τB . Now, by defining new coordinate θ, φ via the relations
                                                     θ iφ 1 + iτ
                                           tanh        e =        ,                                   (G.3)
                                                     2     1 − iτ

                                                         177
we can express the metric (G.2) and the measure (G.1) as

                             2     2       2     2        d2 τ
                          ds = dθ + sinh θdφ ,                 = sinh θ dθ dφ .                  (G.4)
                                                          τ22

Since J is independent of the base point ~τB , we can calculate it by taking the base point to be at
θ = 0. The geodesics passing through this point are constant φ lines, and the length measured along
such a geodesic is given by θ. Thus we have

                                        ξ~ = (θ cos φ, θ sin φ) .                                (G.5)

This gives
                                            d2 ξ = θdθdφ .                                       (G.6)

Comparing this with (G.4) we get

                                  d2 τ   sinh θ 2   1        ~ d2 ξ .
                                    2
                                       =       dξ=     sinh |ξ|                                  (G.7)
                                  τ2        θ       ~
                                                   |ξ|

Thus
                                                ~ = 1 sinh |ξ|
                                       J (~τB , ξ)          ~ .                                  (G.8)
                                                     ~
                                                    |ξ|

H      The Coefficient of the Gauss-Bonnet Term in Type IIB
       on (M × Se1 × S 1 )/ ZZN
An important four derivative correction to the effective action in the N = 4 supersymmetric string
theories analyzed in this review is the Gauss-Bonnet term. In this appendix we shall describe the
computation of this term.
   The calculation is best carried out in the original description of the theory as type IIB string
theory compactified on (M × Se1 × S 1 )/ ZZN . We shall denote by t = t1 + it2 and u = u1 + iu2 the
Kahler and complex structure moduli of the torus Se1 × S 1 , and use the normalization convention
                                                                                             e and
that is appropriate for the orbifold theory as described below (3.1.29). Thus for example if R
R0 denote the radii of Se1 and S 1 measured in the string metric, and if the off-diagonal components
of the metric and the anti-symmetric tensor field are zero, then we shall take t2 = RR    e 0 /N and
          e
u2 = R0 /(RN),  taking into account the fact that in the orbifold theory the various fields have e  g-
                                                                   1
twisted boundary condition under a 2πR0 /N translation along S and 2π R       e translation along Se1 .
In the same spirit we shall choose the units of momentum along S 1 and Se1 to be N/R0 and 1/R
                                                                                            e

                                                  178
respectively, and unit of winding charge along S 1 and Se1 to be 2πR0 /N and 2π R e respectively. As a
result one unit of winding charge along S 1 actually represents a twisted sector state, with twist g.
   It is known that one loop quantum corrections in this theory give rise to a Gauss-Bonnet contri-
bution to the effective Lagrangian density of the form [67]:
                                          
                           ∆L = φ(u1, u2 ) Rµνρσ Rµνρσ − 4Rµν Rµν + R2 ,                            (H.1)

where φ(u1 , u2) is a function to be determined, and Rµνρσ , Rµν and R denote respectively the Riemann
tensor, Ricci tensor and scalar curvature computed from the canonical Einstein metric. Note in
particular that φ is independent of the Kahler modulus t of Se1 × S 1 . The analysis of [67] shows that
φ(u1 , u2) is given by the relation:
                                                     Z
                                                         d2 τ
                                     ∂u φ(u1, u2 ) =          ∂u B4 ,                             (H.2)
                                                       F τ2


where B4 is defined as follows. Let us consider type IIB string theory compactified on (M × Se1 ×
S 1 )/ ZZN in the light-cone gauge Green-Schwarz formulation, denote by T r f the trace over all states in
this world-sheet theory carrying some fixed momentum along the non-compact directions and denote
by Lf0 , L̄f0 the Virasoro generators associated with the left and the right-moving modes, excluding
the contribution from the momenta along the non-compact directions. We also define FLf , FRf to be
the contribution to the space-time fermion numbers from the left and the right-moving modes on the
world-sheet. In this case
                                       f f                
                                    f   L0 L̄0        f
                                                FLf +FR  4
                          B4 = K T r q q̄ (−1)          h ,      q ≡ e2πiτ ,                 (H.3)

where K is a constant to be determined later and h denotes the total helicity of the state. In defining
Lf0 , L̄f0 we subtract the constants cL /24 and cR /24, so that the RR vacuum has Lf0 = L̄f0 = 0.
     The evaluation of the right hand side of (H.3) proceeds as follows. We first note that since
(M × Se1 × S 1 )/ ZZN has SU(2) holonomy, and since a spinor representation of SO(8) transforms as a
pair of doublets and four singlets under this SU(2) group, we have four free left-moving fermions and
four free right-moving fermions associated with the singlets of SU(2). These give rise to altogether
eight fermion zero modes. Since quantization of a conjugate pair of fermion zero modes (ψ0 , ψ0† )
                                                    f    f
gives rise to a pair of states with opposite (−1)FL +FR , without the h4 term the trace in (H.3) will
vanish. This can be avoided if we insert a factor of h in the trace and pick the contribution to h from
                                                                                                 f   f
this particular conjugate pair of fermions, – in this case the two states have the same (−1)FL +FR h
quantum numbers. This can be repeated for every pair of conjugate fermions. Altogether we need

                                                   179
four factors of h to soak up all the eight fermion zero modes. Thus in effect we can simplify (H.3)
by expressing it as                                             f    f         f   f
                                         B4 = K ′ T r f ′ q L0 q̄ L̄0 (−1)FL +FR                                    (H.4)
where K ′ is a different normalization constant and the prime in the trace denotes that we should
ignore the effect of fermion zero modes in evaluating the trace.
   Since we are using the Green-Schwarz formulation, the 4 left-moving and 4 right-moving fermions
which are neutral under the holonomy group satisfy periodic boundary condition. Thus the effect
of the non-zero mode oscillators associated with these fermions cancel against the contribution from
the non-zero mode bosonic oscillators associated with the circles S 1 and Se1 and the two non-compact
directions. This leads to a further simplification in which the trace can be taken over only the degrees
of freedom associated with the compact space M and the bosonic zero modes associated with the
circles S 1 and Se1 . The latter includes the quantum numbers m1 and m2 denoting the number of
units of momentum along Se1 and S 1 , and the quantum numbers n1 and n2 denoting the number of
units of winding along Se1 and S 1 . The units of momentum and winding along the two circles are
chosen according to the convention described earlier. Thus for example m2 unit of momentum along
S 1 will correspond to a physical momentum of Nm2 /R0 in string units. This shows that m2 can
be fractional, being quantized in units of 1/N. On the other hand a sector with n2 unit of winding
along S 1 describes a fundamental string of length 2πn2 R0 /N, and hence this state belongs to a sector
twisted by g n2 .
    In this convention the contributions to L̄f0 and Lf0 from the bosonic zero modes associated with
Se1 × S 1 are given by, respectively,
            1 2      1                                                          1 2   1 2
              kR =        | − m1 u + m2 + n1 t + n2 tu|2 ,                        kL = kR + m1 n1 + m2 n2 .         (H.5)
            2      4t2 u2                                                       2     2
Furthermore, since under the SU(2) holonomy group a vector in the tangent space of M also trans-
form as a pair of doublets, the fermions in our system which transform as doublets of SU(2) may be
regarded as tangent space vectors. As a result, these fermions, together with the scalars associated
with the coordinates of M, describe a superconformal field theory with target space M. Thus (H.4)
may now be rewritten as

            K′ X X
                  N −1 N −1         X                   2 /2 k 2 /2 2πim s
                                                                                                           
                                                       kL                                 FL +FR s L0 L̄0
       B4 =                                        q       q̄ R  e      2
                                                                             T rRR,egr (−1)     g q q̄
                                                                                                e               ,   (H.6)
            N r=0 s=0
                                    zz        zz
                              m1 ,n1 ∈ ,m2 ∈ /N
                                         zz
                                  n2 ∈N +r

                                       g r -twisted sector RR states of the (4,4) superconformal field
where T rRR;egr denotes trace over the e
theory with target space M and L0 and L̄0 denote contribution to the Virasoro generators in this

                                                                180
superconformal field theory with cL /24 and cR /24 subtracted. The sum over s in (H.6) arises from
                                           PN −1 s
the insertion of the projection operator N1 s=0  g in the trace, while the sum over r represents the
sum over various twisted sector states. As required, the quantum number n2 that determines the
part of g-twist along S 1 is correlated with the integer r that determines the amount of g-twist along
M. The e2πim2 s factor represents part of g s that acts as translation along S 1 while the action of g s
                                    g s inserted into the trace.
on M is represented by the operator e
   We now note that the trace part in (H.6) is precisely the quantity N F (r,s) (τ, z = 0) defined in
(B.2) for q = e2πiτ . Thus we can rewrite (H.6) as
                                         N
                                         X −1 N
                                              X −1              X
                                     ′                                           2           2
                           B4 = K                                             q kL /2 q̄ kR /2 e2πim2 s F (r,s) (τ, 0) .        (H.7)
                                         r=0 s=0 m1 ,n1 ∈zz,m2 ∈zz/N
                                                     n2 ∈N zz+r

                                                       b ρ, σ
    We shall now compare (H.7) with the expression for I(e  e, e
                                                               v ) given in (C.3), (C.5) at ρe = u,
σ
e = t and e  v = 0. In this case p2R , p2L defined in (C.2) reduces to kR                     2
                                                                                                  and kL2 + 12 j 2 respectively, with
 2
kR , kL2 given in (H.5). As a result we have
                        Z 2 hN         −1 1                                                                          N −1        i
           b t, 0) =        dτ XX                         X                2        2       2             (r,s)
                                                                                                                     X     (0,s)
           I(u,                                                         q kL /2 q̄ kR /2 q j /4 e2πim2 s hb (τ ) −        c0 (0)
                          F τ2      r,s=0 b=0 m1 ,n1 ∈zz,m2 ∈zz/N                                                    s=0
                                                n2 ∈N zz+r,j∈2zz+b
           Z 2 hN      −1
               dτ X               X              2        2                               (r,s)
       =                                      q kL /2 q̄ kR /2 e2πim2 s (ϑ3 (2τ, 0)h0 (τ )
            F  τ2   r,s=0 m1 ,n1 ∈zz,m2 ∈zz/N
                              n2 ∈N zz+r
                                                   N
                                                   X −1             i
                                     (r,s)                  (0,s)
                    +ϑ2 (2τ, 0)h1 (τ )) −                 c0 (0)
                                                          s=0
           Z          hN
                       X −1         X                                                                   N
                                                                                                        X −1               i
               d2 τ                                     2 /2 k 2 /2 2πim s
                                                       kL                            (r,s)                      (0,s)
      =                                            q       q̄ R     e   2
                                                                               F             (τ, 0) −          c0       (0) ,   (H.8)
             F τ2      r,s=0 m1 ,n1 ∈zz,m2 ∈zz/N                                                        s=0
                                 n2 ∈N zz+r

where in the second step we have expressed the result of summing over j in terms of Jacobi ϑ-
functions, and in the last step we have used eq.(B.3). Comparing (H.7) with (H.8) we see that
                            Z 2               N −1
                                                          !
                               dτ             X     (0,s)
                                     B4 − K ′                   b t, 0) .
                                                   c0 (0) = K ′ I(u,                         (H.9)
                             F  τ2            s=0

Using (C.16) and (C.25) we get
      Z 2                           !
         dτ
                        N
                        X −1                      h
                      ′       (0,s)         ′
              B4 − K         c0 (0)   = −2 K lim (k ln t2 + k ln u2 + 2 ln v + 2 ln v̄
       F τ2             s=0
                                              v→0


                                                                        181
                                                                                        i
                                                 + ln g(t) + ln g(t) + ln g(u) + ln g(u) + constant .
                                                                                                        (H.10)

Naively the right hand side diverges in the v → 0 limit. The origin of this infinity lies in the fact
     R
that d2 τ B4 /τ2 has divergences from integration over the large τ2 region for m
                                                                               ~ = ~n = 0, and this
                                                                                  P (0,s)
divergence is not completely removed by the subtraction term proportional to K ′ s c0 (0) in the
integrand. The correct subtraction term in the integrand
                                                          must be equalto K ′ limτ →i∞ F (0,s) (τ, 0),
                                               P     (0,s)       (0,s)
– from (B.6) we see that this is given by K ′ s c0 (0) + 2c1 (−1) . The extra counteterm
                 (0,s)
proportional to c (−1) is not needed for regulating Ib since the correponding potential divergence
                   1
from the term m1 = n1 = m2 = n2 = 0, j = ±1 in (C.5). takes the form:
   Z 2                              N −1
                                                     !      N −1
      dτ              2π            X      (0,s)
                                                            X      (0,s)         |v|2                     |v|2
                                  2
          exp  −              |v|        c 1     (−1)  ≃ −2      c 1     (−1) ln       + constant ≃ −4 ln
      τ22         t2 u2 − v22       s=0                     s=0
                                                                                 t2 u2                    t2 u2
                                                                                                          (H.11)
for small v. This is divergent in the v → 0 limit but finite for small but finite v. Thus in order to
recover                       Z        "                               #
                                  d2 τ           X  (0,s)     (0,s)
                                                                     
                                        B4 − K ′    c0 (0) + 2c1 (−1)                                   (H.12)
                                   τ2            s
                                                            2
from Ib we need to first remove the contribution −4 ln t|v|
                                                         2 u2
                                                              from Ib and then take the v → 0 limit.
This gives
         Z 2                 −1 
                                                     !
             dτ
                           N
                           X                       
                                  (0,s)     (0,s)
                  B4 − K ′       c0 (0) + 2c1 (−1)
           F τ2            s=0
      = −2 K ′ ((k + 2) ln t2 + (k + 2) ln u2 + ln g(t) + ln g(−t̄) + ln g(u) + ln g(−ū)) + constant .
                                                                                                        (H.13)

In writing down (H.13) we have used g(t) = g(−t̄), – this follows from the definition (C.27) of g(ρ)
and the identity sr = s−r . Comparing (H.2) with (H.13) we now get

                   φ(u1 , u2) = −2 K ′ ((k + 2) ln u2 + ln g(u) + ln g(−ū)) + constant .               (H.14)

   We now turn to the determination of K ′ . This constant is universal independent of the specific
theory we are analysing. Thus we can find it by working with the type IIB string theory compactified
on K3 × Se1 × S 1 . In this case k = 10 and g(τ ) = η(τ )24 . This matches with the known answer [72,83]
for φ(u1 , u2) if we choose K ′ = 1/(128π 2). Thus we have
                                      1
                  φ(u1 , u2 ) = −         ((k + 2) ln u2 + ln g(u) + ln g(−ū)) + constant .            (H.15)
                                    64π 2
                                                      182
   Under the duality map that relates type IIB string theory on the ZZN orbifold of M × Se1 × S 1
to an asymmetric ZZN orbifold of heterotic or type IIA string theory on T 6 , the modulus u of the
original type IIB string theory gets related to the axion-dilaton modulus a+iS of the final asymmetric
orbifold theory. Thus in this description the Gauss-Bonnet term in the effective Lagrangian density
takes the form
                                           
                            ∆L = φ(a, S) Rµνρσ Rµνρσ − 4Rµν Rµν + R2 .                          (H.16)


References
 [1] A. Strominger and C. Vafa, “Microscopic Origin of the Bekenstein-Hawking Entropy,” Phys. Lett. B
     379, 99 (1996) [arXiv:hep-th/9601029].
 [2] H. Ooguri, A. Strominger and C. Vafa, “Black hole attractors and the topological string,”
     arXiv:hep-th/0405146.
 [3] A. Sen, “Black hole entropy function and the attractor mechanism in higher derivative gravity,” JHEP
     0509, 038 (2005) [arXiv:hep-th/0506177].
 [4] A. Sen, “Entropy function for heterotic black holes,” JHEP 0603, 008 (2006) [arXiv:hep-th/0508042].
 [5] R. M. Wald, “Black hole entropy in the Noether charge,” Phys. Rev. D 48, 3427 (1993)
     [arXiv:gr-qc/9307038].
 [6] J. R. David and A. Sen, “CHL dyons and statistical entropy function from D1-D5 system,”
     arXiv:hep-th/0605210.
 [7] J. R. David, D. P. Jatkar and A. Sen, “Dyon spectrum in N = 4 supersymmetric type II string theories,”
     arXiv:hep-th/0607155.
 [8] J. R. David, D. P. Jatkar and A. Sen, “Dyon spectrum in generic N = 4 supersymmetric Z(N) orbifolds,”
     arXiv:hep-th/0609109.
 [9] R. Dijkgraaf, E. P. Verlinde and H. L. Verlinde, “Counting dyons in N = 4 string theory,” Nucl. Phys.
     B 484, 543 (1997) [arXiv:hep-th/9607026].
[10] D. P. Jatkar and A. Sen, “Dyon spectrum in CHL models,” JHEP 0604,                        018 (2006)
     [arXiv:hep-th/0510147].
[11] J. R. David, D. P. Jatkar and A. Sen, “Product representation of dyon partition function in CHL
     models,” JHEP 0606, 064 (2006) [arXiv:hep-th/0602254].
[12] A. Dabholkar and S. Nampuri, “Spectrum of dyons and black holes in CHL orbifolds using Borcherds
     lift,” arXiv:hep-th/0603066.
[13] D. Shih, A. Strominger and X. Yin, “Recounting dyons in N = 4 string theory,” arXiv:hep-th/0505094.
[14] D. Gaiotto, “Re-recounting dyons in N = 4 string theory,” arXiv:hep-th/0506249.
[15] D. Shih and X. Yin, “Exact black hole degeneracies and the topological string,” arXiv:hep-th/0508174.


                                                   183
[16] D. Shih, A. Strominger and X. Yin, “Counting dyons in N = 8 string theory,” arXiv:hep-th/0506151.
[17] A. Dabholkar and D. Gaiotto, “Spectrum of CHL dyons from genus-two partition function,”
     arXiv:hep-th/0612011.
[18] G. L. Cardoso, B. de Wit, J. Kappeli and T. Mohaupt, “Asymptotic degeneracy of dyonic N = 4 string
     states and black hole entropy,” JHEP 0412, 075 (2004) [arXiv:hep-th/0412287].
[19] P. Kraus and F. Larsen, “Microscopic black hole entropy in theories with higher derivatives,”
     arXiv:hep-th/0506176.
[20] P. Kraus and F. Larsen, “Holographic gravitational anomalies,” arXiv:hep-th/0508218.
[21] P. Kraus and F. Larsen,         “Partition   functions   and   elliptic   genera   from   supergravity,”
     arXiv:hep-th/0607138.
[22] P. Kraus, “Lectures on black holes and the AdS(3)/CFT(2) correspondence,” arXiv:hep-th/0609074.
[23] H. K. Kunduri, J. Lucietti and H. S. Reall, “Near-horizon symmetries of extremal black holes,”
     arXiv:0705.4214 [hep-th].
[24] D. Astefanesei, K. Goldstein, R. P. Jena, A. Sen and S. P. Trivedi, “Rotating attractors,” JHEP 0610,
     058 (2006) [arXiv:hep-th/0606244].
[25] T. Jacobson, G. Kang and R. C. Myers, “On Black Hole Entropy,” Phys. Rev. D 49, 6587 (1994)
     [arXiv:gr-qc/9312023].
[26] V. Iyer and R. M. Wald, “Some properties of Noether charge and a proposal for dynamical black hole
     entropy,” Phys. Rev. D 50, 846 (1994) [arXiv:gr-qc/9403028].
[27] T. Jacobson, G. Kang and R. C. Myers, “Black hole entropy in higher curvature gravity,”
     arXiv:gr-qc/9502009.
[28] K. Goldstein, N. Iizuka, R. P. Jena and S. P. Trivedi, “Non-supersymmetric attractors,” Phys. Rev. D
     72, 124021 (2005) [arXiv:hep-th/0507096].
[29] S. Ferrara, R. Kallosh and A. Strominger, “N=2 extremal black holes,” Phys. Rev. D 52, 5412 (1995)
     [arXiv:hep-th/9508072].
[30] A. Strominger, “Macroscopic Entropy of N = 2 Extremal Black Holes,” Phys. Lett. B 383, 39 (1996)
     [arXiv:hep-th/9602111].
[31] S. Ferrara and R. Kallosh, “Supersymmetry and Attractors,” Phys. Rev. D 54, 1514 (1996)
     [arXiv:hep-th/9602136].
[32] A. Dabholkar, A. Sen and S. Trivedi, “Black hole microstates and attractor without supersymmetry,”
     arXiv:hep-th/0611143.
[33] J. C. Breckenridge, R. C. Myers, A. W. Peet and C. Vafa, “D-branes and spinning black holes,” Phys.
     Lett. B 391, 93 (1997) [arXiv:hep-th/9602065].
[34] R. Kallosh, A. Rajaraman and W. K. Wong, “Supersymmetric rotating black holes and attractors,”
     Phys. Rev. D 55, 3246 (1997) [arXiv:hep-th/9611094].
[35] W. Li and A. Strominger, “Supersymmetric probes in a rotating 5D attractor,” arXiv:hep-th/0605139.

                                                   184
[36] J. M. Bardeen and G. T. Horowitz, “The extreme Kerr throat geometry: A vacuum analog of AdS(2)
     x S(2),” Phys. Rev. D 60, 104030 (1999) [arXiv:hep-th/9905099].
[37] D. Rasheed, “The rotating dyonic black holes of kaluza-klein theory,” Nucl. Phys. B454 (1995) 379–401,
     [arXiv:hep-th/9505038].
[38] M. Cvetic and D. Youm, “Entropy of Non-Extreme Charged Rotating Black Holes in String Theory,”
     Phys. Rev. D 54, 2612 (1996) [arXiv:hep-th/9603147].
[39] T. Matos and C. Mora, “Stationary dilatons with arbitrary electromagnetic field,” Class. Quant. Grav.
     14 (1997) 2331–2340, [arXiv:hep-th/9610013].
[40] F. Larsen, “Rotating       kaluza-klein   black   holes,”   Nucl.   Phys.   B575     (2000)   211–230,
     [arXiv:hep-th/9909102].
[41] R. Emparan and H. S. Reall, “A rotating black ring in five dimensions,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 101101
     (2002) [arXiv:hep-th/0110260].
[42] H. Elvang, R. Emparan, D. Mateos and H. S. Reall, “Supersymmetric black rings and three-charge
     supertubes,” Phys. Rev. D 71, 024033 (2005) [arXiv:hep-th/0408120].
[43] Y. Tachikawa, “Black hole entropy in the presence of Chern-Simons terms,” Class. Quant. Grav. 24,
     737 (2007) [arXiv:hep-th/0611141].
[44] B. Sahoo and A. Sen, “alpha’ corrections to extremal dyonic black holes in heterotic string theory,”
     arXiv:hep-th/0608182.
[45] B. Sahoo and A. Sen, “BTZ black hole with Chern-Simons and higher derivative terms,” JHEP 0607,
     008 (2006) [arXiv:hep-th/0601228].
[46] S. Deser, R. Jackiw and S. Templeton, “Topologically Massive Gauge Theories,” Annals Phys. 140,
     372 (1982) [Erratum-ibid. 185, 406.1988 APNYA,281,409 (1988 APNYA,281,409-449.2 000)].
[47] S. Deser, R. Jackiw and S. Templeton, “Three-Dimensional Massive Gauge Theories,” Phys. Rev. Lett.
     48, 975 (1982).
[48] G. Guralnik, A. Iorio, R. Jackiw and S. Y. Pi, “Dimensionally reduced gravitational Chern-Simons
     term and its kink,” Annals Phys. 308, 222 (2003) [arXiv:hep-th/0305117].
[49] C. M. Hull and P. K. Townsend, “Unity of superstring dualities,” Nucl. Phys. B 438, 109 (1995)
     [arXiv:hep-th/9410167].
[50] M. J. Duff, “Strong / weak coupling duality from the dual string,” Nucl. Phys. B 442, 47 (1995)
     [arXiv:hep-th/9501030].
[51] E. Witten, “String theory dynamics in various dimensions,” Nucl. Phys. B 443, 85 (1995)
     [arXiv:hep-th/9503124].
[52] A. Sen, “String string duality conjecture in six-dimensions and charged solitonic strings,” Nucl. Phys.
     B 450, 103 (1995) [arXiv:hep-th/9504027].
[53] J. A. Harvey and A. Strominger, “The heterotic string is a soliton,” Nucl. Phys. B 449, 535 (1995)
     [Erratum-ibid. B 458, 456 (1996)] [arXiv:hep-th/9504047].


                                                    185
[54] A. Sen and C. Vafa, “Dual pairs of type II string compactification,” Nucl. Phys. B 455, 165 (1995)
     [arXiv:hep-th/9508064].
[55] S. Chaudhuri, G. Hockney and J. D. Lykken, “Maximally supersymmetric string theories in D ¡ 10,”
     Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 2264 (1995) [arXiv:hep-th/9505054].
[56] S. Chaudhuri and J. Polchinski, “Moduli space of CHL strings,” Phys. Rev. D 52, 7168 (1995)
     [arXiv:hep-th/9506048].
[57] C. Vafa and E. Witten, “Dual string pairs with N = 1 and N = 2 supersymmetry in four dimensions,”
     Nucl. Phys. Proc. Suppl. 46, 225 (1996) [arXiv:hep-th/9507050].
[58] S. Chaudhuri and D. A. Lowe, “Type IIA heterotic duals with maximal supersymmetry,” Nucl. Phys.
     B 459, 113 (1996) [arXiv:hep-th/9508144].
[59] P. S. Aspinwall, “Some relationships between dualities in string theory,” Nucl. Phys. Proc. Suppl. 46,
     30 (1996) [arXiv:hep-th/9508154].
[60] J. Maharana and J. H. Schwarz, “Noncompact symmetries in string theory,” Nucl. Phys. B 390, 3
     (1993) [arXiv:hep-th/9207016].
[61] A. Sen, “Strong - weak coupling duality in four-dimensional string theory,” Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 9,
     3707 (1994) [arXiv:hep-th/9402002].
[62] D. J. Gross and M. J. Perry, “Magnetic Monopoles In Kaluza-Klein Theories,” Nucl. Phys. B 226, 29
     (1983).
[63] R. d. Sorkin, “Kaluza-Klein Monopole,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 51, 87 (1983).
[64] J. P. Gauntlett, J. A. Harvey and J. T. Liu, “Magnetic monopoles in string theory,” Nucl. Phys. B
     409, 363 (1993) [arXiv:hep-th/9211056].
[65] B. Zwiebach, “Curvature Squared Terms And String Theories,” Phys. Lett. B 156, 315 (1985).
[66] J. A. Harvey and G. W. Moore, “Fivebrane instantons and R**2 couplings in N = 4 string theory,”
     Phys. Rev. D 57, 2323 (1998) [arXiv:hep-th/9610237].
[67] A. Gregori, E. Kiritsis, C. Kounnas, N. A. Obers, P. M. Petropoulos and B. Pioline, “R**2 correc-
     tions and non-perturbative dualities of N = 4 string ground states,” Nucl. Phys. B 510, 423 (1998)
     [arXiv:hep-th/9708062].
[68] M. Bershadsky, S. Cecotti, H. Ooguri and C. Vafa, “Holomorphic anomalies in topological field theo-
     ries,” Nucl. Phys. B 405, 279 (1993) [arXiv:hep-th/9302103].
[69] I. Antoniadis, E. Gava, K. S. Narain and T. R. Taylor, “Topological amplitudes in string theory,” Nucl.
     Phys. B 413, 162 (1994) [arXiv:hep-th/9307158].
[70] M. Bershadsky, S. Cecotti, H. Ooguri and C. Vafa, “Kodaira-Spencer theory of gravity and exact results
     for quantum string amplitudes,” Commun. Math. Phys. 165, 311 (1994) [arXiv:hep-th/9309140].
[71] J. M. Maldacena, A. Strominger and E. Witten, “Black hole entropy in M-theory,” JHEP 9712, 002
     (1997) [arXiv:hep-th/9711053].
[72] G. Lopes Cardoso, B. de Wit and T. Mohaupt, “Macroscopic entropy formulae and non-holomorphic
     corrections for supersymmetric black holes,” Nucl. Phys. B 567, 87 (2000) [arXiv:hep-th/9906094].

                                                    186
[73] B. Sahoo and A. Sen, “Higher derivative corrections to non-supersymmetric extremal black holes in N
     = 2 supergravity,” JHEP 0609, 029 (2006) [arXiv:hep-th/0603149].
[74] B. de Wit, J. W. van Holten and A. Van Proeyen, “Transformation Rules Of N=2 Supergravity Mul-
     tiplets,” Nucl. Phys. B 167, 186 (1980).
[75] E. Bergshoeff, M. de Roo and B. de Wit, “Extended Conformal Supergravity,” Nucl. Phys. B 182, 173
     (1981).
[76] B. de Wit, J. W. van Holten and A. Van Proeyen, “Structure Of N=2 Supergravity,” Nucl. Phys. B
     184, 77 (1981) [Erratum-ibid. B 222, 516 (1983)].
[77] B. de Wit and A. Van Proeyen, “Potentials And Symmetries Of General Gauged N=2 Supergravity -
     Yang-Mills Models,” Nucl. Phys. B 245, 89 (1984).
[78] B. de Wit, P. G. Lauwers and A. Van Proeyen, “Lagrangians Of N=2 Supergravity - Matter Systems,”
     Nucl. Phys. B 255, 569 (1985).
[79] B. de Wit, R. Philippe and A. Van Proeyen, “The Improved Tensor Multiplet In N=2 Supergravity,”
     Nucl. Phys. B 219, 143 (1983).
[80] B. de Wit, P. G. Lauwers, R. Philippe, S. Q. Su and A. Van Proeyen, “Gauge And Matter Fields
     Coupled To N=2 Supergravity,” Phys. Lett. B 134, 37 (1984).
[81] B. de Wit, “N = 2 electric-magnetic duality in a chiral background,” Nucl. Phys. Proc. Suppl. 49, 191
     (1996) [arXiv:hep-th/9602060].
[82] B. de Wit, “N=2 symplectic reparametrizations in a chiral background,” Fortsch. Phys. 44, 529 (1996)
     [arXiv:hep-th/9603191].
[83] T. Mohaupt, “Black hole entropy, special geometry and strings,” Fortsch. Phys. 49, 3 (2001)
     [arXiv:hep-th/0007195].
[84] K. Behrndt, G. Lopes Cardoso, B. de Wit, D. Lust, T. Mohaupt and W. A. Sabra, “Higher-order
     black-hole solutions in N = 2 supergravity and Calabi-Yau string backgrounds,” Phys. Lett. B 429,
     289 (1998) [arXiv:hep-th/9801081].
[85] G. Lopes Cardoso, B. de Wit and T. Mohaupt, “Corrections to macroscopic supersymmetric black-hole
     entropy,” Phys. Lett. B 451, 309 (1999) [arXiv:hep-th/9812082].
[86] G. Lopes Cardoso, B. de Wit and T. Mohaupt, “Deviations from the area law for supersymmetric black
     holes,” Fortsch. Phys. 48, 49 (2000) [arXiv:hep-th/9904005].
[87] G. Lopes Cardoso, B. de Wit and T. Mohaupt, “Area law corrections from state counting and super-
     gravity,” Class. Quant. Grav. 17, 1007 (2000) [arXiv:hep-th/9910179].
[88] G. Lopes Cardoso, B. de Wit, J. Kappeli and T. Mohaupt, “Stationary BPS solutions in N = 2
     supergravity with R**2 interactions,” JHEP 0012, 019 (2000) [arXiv:hep-th/0009234].
[89] G. L. Cardoso, B. de Wit, J. Kappeli and T. Mohaupt, “Examples of stationary BPS solutions in N =
     2 supergravity theories with R**2-interactions,” Fortsch. Phys. 49, 557 (2001) [arXiv:hep-th/0012232].
[90] K. Behrndt, G. Lopes Cardoso and S. Mahapatra, “Exploring the relation between 4D and 5D BPS
     solutions,” Nucl. Phys. B 732, 200 (2006) [arXiv:hep-th/0506251].

                                                   187
[91] A. Dabholkar and J. A. Harvey, “Nonrenormalization of the Superstring Tension,” Phys. Rev. Lett.
     63, 478 (1989).
[92] A. Dabholkar, G. W. Gibbons, J. A. Harvey and F. Ruiz Ruiz, “SUPERSTRINGS AND SOLITONS,”
     Nucl. Phys. B 340, 33 (1990).
[93] A. Sen, “Extremal black holes and elementary string states,” Mod. Phys. Lett. A 10, 2081 (1995)
     [arXiv:hep-th/9504147].
[94] A. W. Peet, “Entropy And Supersymmetry Of D-Dimensional Extremal Electric Black Holes Versus
     String States,” Nucl. Phys. B 456, 732 (1995) [arXiv:hep-th/9506200].
[95] A. Sen, “Black holes and elementary string states in N = 2 supersymmetric string theories,” JHEP
     9802, 011 (1998) [arXiv:hep-th/9712150].
[96] A. Dabholkar, “Exact counting of black hole microstates,” arXiv:hep-th/0409148.
[97] A. Sen, “Stretching the horizon of a higher dimensional small black hole,” JHEP 0507, 073 (2005)
     [arXiv:hep-th/0505122].
[98] A. Dabholkar, R. Kallosh and A. Maloney, “A stringy cloak for a classical singularity,”
     arXiv:hep-th/0410076.
[99] A. Sen, “How does a fundamental string stretch its horizon?,” arXiv:hep-th/0411255.
[100] V. Hubeny, A. Maloney and M. Rangamani, “String-corrected black holes,” arXiv:hep-th/0411272.
[101] D. Bak, S. Kim and S. J. Rey, “Exactly soluble BPS black holes in higher curvature N = 2 supergrav-
     ity,” arXiv:hep-th/0501014.
[102] A. Dabholkar, N. Iizuka, A. Iqubal, A. Sen and M. Shigemori, “Spinning strings as small black rings,”
     arXiv:hep-th/0611166.
[103] N. Iizuka and M. Shigemori, “A note on D1-D5-J system and 5D small black ring,” JHEP 0508, 100
     (2005) [arXiv:hep-th/0506215].
[104] A. Dabholkar, N. Iizuka, A. Iqubal and M. Shigemori, “Precision microstate counting of small black
     rings,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 071601 (2006) [arXiv:hep-th/0511120].
[105] A. Giveon and D. Kutasov, “Fundamental strings and black holes,” JHEP 0701, 071 (2007)
     [arXiv:hep-th/0611062].
[106] A. Dabholkar and S. Murthy, .“Fundamental Superstrings as Holograms,” arXiv:0707.3818.
[107] C. Johnson, “Heterotic Coset Models of Microscopic Strings and BlackHoles,” arXiv:0707.4303.
[108] J. M. Lapan, A. Simons and A. Strominger, .“Fundamental Superstrings as Holograms,”
     arXiv:0708.0016.
[109] M. Banados, C. Teitelboim and J. Zanelli, “The Black hole in three-dimensional space-time,” Phys.
     Rev. Lett. 69, 1849 (1992) [arXiv:hep-th/9204099].
[110] K. Sfetsos and K. Skenderis, “Microscopic derivation of the Bekenstein-Hawking entropy formula for
     non-extremal black holes,” Nucl. Phys. B 517, 179 (1998) [arXiv:hep-th/9711138].


                                                   188
[111] A. Strominger, “Black hole entropy from near-horizon microstates,” JHEP 9802, 009 (1998)
     [arXiv:hep-th/9712251].
[112] K. Skenderis, “Black holes and branes in string theory,” Lect. Notes Phys. 541, 325 (2000)
     [arXiv:hep-th/9901050].
[113] J. D. Brown and M. Henneaux, “Central Charges In The Canonical Realization Of Asymptotic Sym-
     metries: An Example From Three-Dimensional Gravity,” Commun. Math. Phys. 104, 207 (1986).
[114] J. F. Morales and H. Samtleben, “Entropy function and attractors for AdS black holes,” JHEP 0610,
     074 (2006) [arXiv:hep-th/0608044].
[115] G. L. Cardoso, J. M. Oberreuter and J. Perz, “Entropy function for rotating extremal black holes in
     very special geometry,” arXiv:hep-th/0701176.
[116] H. Saida and J. Soda, “Statistical entropy of BTZ black hole in higher curvature gravity,” Phys. Lett.
     B 471, 358 (2000) [arXiv:gr-qc/9909061].
[117] J. M. Maldacena and A. Strominger, “AdS(3) black holes and a stringy exclusion principle,” JHEP
     9812, 005 (1998) [arXiv:hep-th/9804085].
[118] S. N. Solodukhin, “Holography with gravitational Chern-Simons,” Phys. Rev. D 74, 024015 (2006)
     [arXiv:hep-th/0509148].
[119] A. Achucarro and M. E. Ortiz, “Relating black holes in two-dimensions and three-dimensions,” Phys.
     Rev. D 48, 3600 (1993) [arXiv:hep-th/9304068].
[120] H. J. Boonstra, B. Peeters and K. Skenderis, “Brane intersections, anti-de Sitter spacetimes and dual
     superconformal theories,” Nucl. Phys. B 533, 127 (1998) [arXiv:hep-th/9803231].
[121] J. M. Maldacena, “The large N limit of superconformal field theories and supergravity,” Adv. Theor.
     Math. Phys. 2, 231 (1998) [Int. J. Theor. Phys. 38, 1113 (1999)] [arXiv:hep-th/9711200].
[122] S. S. Gubser, I. R. Klebanov and A. M. Polyakov, “Gauge theory correlators from non-critical string
     theory,” Phys. Lett. B 428, 105 (1998) [arXiv:hep-th/9802109].
[123] E. Witten, “Anti-de Sitter space and holography,” Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 2, 253 (1998)
     [arXiv:hep-th/9802150].
[124] M. Henningson and K. Skenderis, “The holographic Weyl anomaly,” JHEP 9807, 023 (1998)
     [arXiv:hep-th/9806087].
[125] E. Witten, “Three-Dimensional Gravity Revisited,” arXiv:0706.3359 [hep-th].
[126] J. R. David, B. Sahoo and A. Sen, “AdS3 , Black Holes and Higher Derivative Corrections,”
     arXiv:0705.0735 [hep-th].
[127] M. Nishimura and Y. Tanii, “Super Weyl anomalies in the AdS/CFT correspondence,” Int. J. Mod.
     Phys. A 14, 3731 (1999) [arXiv:hep-th/9904010].
[128] J. R. David, “Anti-de Sitter gravity associated with the supergroup SU(1,1—2) x SU(1,1—2),” Mod.
     Phys. Lett. A 14, 1143 (1999) [arXiv:hep-th/9904068].
[129] A. Achucarro and P. K. Townsend, “A CHERN-SIMONS ACTION FOR THREE-DIMENSIONAL
     ANTI-DE SITTER SUPERGRAVITY THEORIES,” Phys. Lett. B 180, 89 (1986).

                                                    189
[130] A. Achucarro and P. K. Townsend, “EXTENDED SUPERGRAVITIES IN d = (2+1) AS CHERN-
     SIMONS THEORIES,” Phys. Lett. B 229, 383 (1989).
[131] A. Giacomini, R. Troncoso and S. Willison,            “Three-dimensional supergravity reloaded,”
     arXiv:hep-th/0610077.
[132] E. Witten, “(2+1)-Dimensional Gravity as an Exactly Soluble System,” Nucl. Phys. B 311, 46 (1988).
[133] G. Exirifard, “The world-sheet corrections to dyons in the heterotic theory,” arXiv:hep-th/0607094.
[134] A. Castro, J. L. Davis, P. Kraus and F. Larsen, “5D attractors with higher derivatives,” JHEP 0704,
     091 (2007) [arXiv:hep-th/0702072].
[135] A. Castro, J. L. Davis, P. Kraus and F. Larsen, “5D Black Holes and Strings with Higher Derivatives,”
     arXiv:hep-th/0703087.
[136] M. Alishahiha, “On R**2 corrections for 5D black holes,” arXiv:hep-th/0703099.
[137] K. Hanaki, K. Ohashi and Y. Tachikawa, “Supersymmetric Completion of an R2 Term in Five-
     Dimensional Supergravity,” Prog. Theor. Phys. 117, 533 (2007) [arXiv:hep-th/0611329].
[138] R. Metsaev and A. Tseytlin, Nucl.Phys. B293 (1987) 385.
[139] C. M. Hull and P. K. Townsend, “The Two Loop Beta Function For Sigma Models With Torsion,”
     Phys. Lett. B 191, 115 (1987).
[140] F. Denef, “Supergravity flows and D-brane stability,” JHEP 0008, 050 (2000) [arXiv:hep-th/0005049].
[141] F. Denef, “On the correspondence between D-branes and stationary supergravity solutions of type II
     Calabi-Yau compactifications”, arXiv:hep-th/0010222.
[142] F. Denef, B. R. Greene and M. Raugas, “Split attractor flows and the spectrum of BPS D-branes on
     the quintic,” JHEP 0105, 012 (2001) [arXiv:hep-th/0101135].
[143] F. Denef, “Quantum quivers and Hall/hole halos,” JHEP 0210, 023 (2002) [arXiv:hep-th/0206072].
[144] B. Bates and F. Denef, “Exact solutions for supersymmetric stationary black hole composites,”
     arXiv:hep-th/0304094.
[145] F. Denef and G. W. Moore, “Split states, entropy enigmas, holes and halos,” arXiv:hep-th/0702146.
[146] F. Denef and G. W. Moore, “How many black holes fit on the head of a pin?,” arXiv:0705.2564
     [hep-th].
[147] E. Diaconescu and G. W. Moore, “Crossing the Wall: Branes vs. Bundles,” arXiv:0706.3193 [hep-th].
[148] J. C. Breckenridge, D. A. Lowe, R. C. Myers, A. W. Peet, A. Strominger and C. Vafa, “Macroscopic
     and Microscopic Entropy of Near-Extremal Spinning Black Holes,” Phys. Lett. B 381, 423 (1996)
     [arXiv:hep-th/9603078].
[149] M. Bershadsky, C. Vafa and V. Sadov, “D-Branes and Topological Field Theories,” Nucl. Phys. B
     463, 420 (1996) [arXiv:hep-th/9511222].
[150] M. C. N. Cheng and E. Verlinde, “Dying Dyons Don’t Count,” arXiv:0706.2363 [hep-th].


                                                   190
[151] N. Banerjee, D. P. Jatkar and A. Sen, “Adding Charges to N=4 Dyons,” arXiv:0705.1433 [hep-th].
[152] O. Bergman, “Three-pronged strings and 1/4 BPS states in N=4 super-Yang-Mills theory,” Nucl.
     Phys. B 525, 104 (1998) [arXiv:hep-th/9712211].
[153] G. W. Moore, “Les Houches lectures on strings and arithmetic,” arXiv:hep-th/0401049.
[154] A. Sen, “Two Centered Black Holes and N=4 Dyon Spectrum,” arXiv:0705.3874 [hep-th].
[155] A. Sen, “Kaluza-Klein      dyons   in   string   theory,”   Phys.   Rev.   Lett.   79,   1619   (1997)
     [arXiv:hep-th/9705212].
[156] T. Eguchi, P. B. Gilkey and A. J. Hanson, “Gravitation, Gauge Theories And Differential Geometry,”
     Phys. Rept. 66, 213 (1980).
[157] D. Brill, Phys. Rev. B133 (1964) 845.
[158] C. N. Pope, “Axial Vector Anomalies And The Index Theorem In Charged Schwarzschild And Taub
     - Nut Spaces,” Nucl. Phys. B 141, 432 (1978).
[159] J. P. Gauntlett, N. Kim, J. Park and P. Yi, “Monopole dynamics and BPS dyons in N = 2 super-
     Yang-Mills theories,” Phys. Rev. D 61, 125012 (2000) [arXiv:hep-th/9912082].
[160] D. Gaiotto, A. Strominger and X. Yin, “New connections between 4D and 5D black holes,” JHEP
     0602, 024 (2006) [arXiv:hep-th/0503217].
[161] J. G. Russo and L. Susskind, “Asymptotic level density in heterotic string theory and rotating black
     holes,” Nucl. Phys. B 437, 611 (1995) [arXiv:hep-th/9405117].
[162] J. R. David, G. Mandal and S. R. Wadia, “Microscopic formulation of black holes in string theory,”
     Phys. Rept. 369, 549 (2002) [arXiv:hep-th/0203048].
[163] R. Dijkgraaf, G. W. Moore, E. P. Verlinde and H. L. Verlinde, “Elliptic genera of symmetric products
     and second quantized strings,” Commun. Math. Phys. 185, 197 (1997) [arXiv:hep-th/9608096].
[164] N. Nekrasov and A. S. Schwarz, “Instantons on noncommutative R**4 and (2,0) superconformal six
     dimensional theory,” Commun. Math. Phys. 198, 689 (1998) [arXiv:hep-th/9802068].
[165] N. Seiberg and E. Witten, “String theory and noncommutative geometry,” JHEP 9909, 032 (1999)
     [arXiv:hep-th/9908142].
[166] R. C. Myers, “Dielectric-branes,” JHEP 9912, 022 (1999) [arXiv:hep-th/9910053].
[167] A. Dabholkar, D. Gaiotto and S. Nampuri, “Comments on the spectrum of CHL dyons,”
     arXiv:hep-th/0702150.
[168] A. Sen, “Walls of Marginal Stability and Dyon Spectrum in N=4 Supersymmetric String Theories,”
     arXiv:hep-th/0702141.
[169] A. Sen, “Rare Decay Modes of Quarter BPS Dyons” arXiv:0707.1563 [hep-th].
[170] A. Mukherjee, S. Mukhi and R. Nigam, “Dyon Death Eaters,” arXiv:0707.3035 [hep-th].
[171] M. Cvetic and D. Youm, “Dyonic BPS saturated black holes of heterotic string on a six torus,” Phys.
     Rev. D 53, 584 (1996) [arXiv:hep-th/9507090].

                                                   191
[172] M. J. Duff, J. T. Liu and J. Rahmfeld, “Four-Dimensional String-String-String Triality,” Nucl. Phys.
     B 459, 125 (1996) [arXiv:hep-th/9508094].
[173] G. L. Cardoso, B. de Wit, J. Kappeli and T. Mohaupt, “Black hole partition functions and duality,”
     arXiv:hep-th/0601108.
[174] A. Sen, “Black holes, elementary strings and holomorphic anomaly,” arXiv:hep-th/0502126.
[175] A. Dabholkar, F. Denef, G. W. Moore and B. Pioline, “Exact and asymptotic degeneracies of small
     black holes,” arXiv:hep-th/0502157.
[176] A. Dabholkar, F. Denef, G. W. Moore and B. Pioline, “Precision counting of small black holes,” JHEP
     0510, 096 (2005) [arXiv:hep-th/0507014].
[177] V. Balasubramanian, P. Kraus and M. Shigemori, “Massless black holes and black rings as effective
     geometries of the D1-D5 system,” Class. Quant. Grav. 22, 4803 (2005) [arXiv:hep-th/0508110].
[178] R. Kallosh, “New attractors,” JHEP 0512, 022 (2005) [arXiv:hep-th/0510024].
[179] P. K. Tripathy and S. P. Trivedi, “Non-supersymmetric attractors in string theory,” JHEP 0603, 022
     (2006) [arXiv:hep-th/0511117].
[180] P. Prester, “Lovelock type gravity and small black holes in heterotic string theory,” JHEP 0602, 039
     (2006) [arXiv:hep-th/0511306].
[181] T. Mohaupt, “Strings, higher curvature corrections, and black holes,” arXiv:hep-th/0512048.
[182] K. Goldstein, R. P. Jena, G. Mandal and S. P. Trivedi, “A C-function for non-supersymmetric attrac-
     tors,” JHEP 0602, 053 (2006) [arXiv:hep-th/0512138].
[183] M. Alishahiha and H. Ebrahim, “Non-supersymmetric attractors and entropy function,” JHEP 0603,
     003 (2006) [arXiv:hep-th/0601016].
[184] A. Sinha and N. V. Suryanarayana, “Extremal single-charge small black holes: Entropy function
     analysis,” Class. Quant. Grav. 23, 3305 (2006) [arXiv:hep-th/0601183].
[185] R. Kallosh, N. Sivanandam and M. Soroush, “The non-BPS black hole attractor equation,” JHEP
     0603, 060 (2006) [arXiv:hep-th/0602005].
[186] B. Chandrasekhar, S. Parvizi, A. Tavanfar and H. Yavartanoo, “Non-supersymmetric attractors in
     R**2 gravities,” JHEP 0608, 004 (2006) [arXiv:hep-th/0602022].
[187] S. Parvizi and A. Tavanfar, “Partition function of non-supersymmetric black holes in the supergravity
     limit,” arXiv:hep-th/0602292.
[188] R. Kallosh, “From BPS to non-BPS black holes canonically,” arXiv:hep-th/0603003.
[189] G. Exirifard, “The alpha’ stretched horizon in heterotic string,” JHEP 0610, 070 (2006)
     [arXiv:hep-th/0604021].
[190] B. Chandrasekhar, “Born-Infeld corrections to the entropy function of heterotic black holes,”
     arXiv:hep-th/0604028.
[191] A. Ghodsi, “R**4 corrections to D1D5p black hole entropy from entropy function formalism,” Phys.
     Rev. D 74, 124026 (2006) [arXiv:hep-th/0604106].

                                                   192
[192] M. Alishahiha and H. Ebrahim, “New attractor, entropy function and black hole partition function,”
     JHEP 0611, 017 (2006) [arXiv:hep-th/0605279].
[193] S. Kar and S. Majumdar, “Noncommutative D(3)-brane, black holes and attractor mechanism,” Phys.
     Rev. D 74, 066003 (2006) [arXiv:hep-th/0606026].
[194] T. Sarkar, G. Sengupta and B. Nath Tiwari, “On the thermodynamic geometry of BTZ black holes,”
     JHEP 0611, 015 (2006) [arXiv:hep-th/0606084].
[195] R. G. Cai and D. W. Pang, “Entropy function for 4-charge extremal black holes in type IIA superstring
     theory,” Phys. Rev. D 74, 064031 (2006) [arXiv:hep-th/0606098].
[196] A. Sinha and N. V. Suryanarayana, “Two-charge small black hole entropy: String-loops and multi-
     strings,” JHEP 0610, 034 (2006) [arXiv:hep-th/0606218].
[197] R. Kallosh, N. Sivanandam and M. Soroush, “Exact attractive non-BPS STU black holes,” Phys. Rev.
     D 74, 065008 (2006) [arXiv:hep-th/0606263].
[198] P. Kaura and A. Misra, “On the existence of non-supersymmetric black hole attractors for two-
     parameter Calabi-Yau’s and attractor equations,” arXiv:hep-th/0607132.
[199] G. L. Cardoso, V. Grass, D. Lust and J. Perz, “Extremal non-BPS black holes and entropy extrem-
     ization,” JHEP 0609, 078 (2006) [arXiv:hep-th/0607202].
[200] B. Pioline, “Lectures on on black holes, topological strings and quantum attractors,” Class. Quant.
     Grav. 23, S981 (2006) [arXiv:hep-th/0607227].
[201] S. Bellucci, S. Ferrara, A. Marrani and A. Yeranyan, “Mirror Fermat Calabi-Yau threefolds and
     Landau-Ginzburg black hole attractors,” arXiv:hep-th/0608091.
[202] H. Arfaei and R. Fareghbal, “Double-horizon limit and decoupling of the dynamics at the horizon,”
     arXiv:hep-th/0608222.
[203] D. Astefanesei, K. Goldstein and S. Mahapatra, “Moduli and (un)attractor black hole thermodynam-
     ics,” arXiv:hep-th/0611140.
[204] B. Chandrasekhar, H. Yavartanoo and S. Yun, “Non-Supersymmetric attractors in BI black holes,”
     arXiv:hep-th/0611240.
[205] L. Andrianopoli, R. D’Auria, S. Ferrara and M. Trigiante, “Extremal black holes in supergravity,”
     arXiv:hep-th/0611345.
[206] A. E. Mosaffa, S. Randjbar-Daemi and M. M. Sheikh-Jabbari, “Non-Abelian magnetized blackholes
     and unstable attractors,” arXiv:hep-th/0612181.
[207] G. L. Cardoso, B. de Wit and S. Mahapatra, “Black hole entropy functions and attractor equations,”
     arXiv:hep-th/0612225.
[208] C. M. Miller, K. Schalm and E. J. Weinberg,               “Nonextremal black holes are BPS,”
     arXiv:hep-th/0612308.
[209] C. M. Chen, D. V. Gal’tsov and D. G. Orlov, “Extremal black holes in D = 4 Gauss-Bonnet gravity,”
     arXiv:hep-th/0701004.


                                                   193
[210] R. D’Auria, S. Ferrara and M. Trigiante, “Critical points of the black-hole potential for homogeneous
     special geometries,” arXiv:hep-th/0701090.
[211] R. G. Cai and D. W. Pang, “Entropy function for non-extremal black holes in string theory,”
     arXiv:hep-th/0701158.
[212] I. Bena and N. P. Warner, “Black holes, black rings and their microstates,” arXiv:hep-th/0701216.
[213] K. Goldstein and R. P. Jena, “One entropy function to rule them all,” arXiv:hep-th/0701221.
[214] S. Bellucci, S. Ferrara and A. Marrani, “Attractor horizon geometries of extremal black holes,”
     arXiv:hep-th/0702019.
[215] R. G. Cai and D. W. Pang, “On Entropy Function for Supersymmetric Black Rings,” JHEP 0704,
     027 (2007) [arXiv:hep-th/0702040].
[216] A. Ceresole and G. Dall’Agata, “Flow equations for non-BPS extremal black holes,” JHEP 0703, 110
     (2007) [arXiv:hep-th/0702088].
[217] J. Raeymaekers, “Open string attractors,” JHEP 0704, 075 (2007) [arXiv:hep-th/0702142].
[218] S. Hyun, W. Kim, J. J. Oh and E. J. Son, “Entropy Function and Universal Entropy of Two-
     Dimensional Extremal Black Holes,” JHEP 0704, 057 (2007) [arXiv:hep-th/0702170].
[219] T. Mohaupt, “Supersymmetric black holes in string theory,” arXiv:hep-th/0703035.
[220] T. Mohaupt, “Duality and black hole partition functions,” arXiv:hep-th/0703036.
[221] T. Mohaupt, “Special geometry, black holes and Euclidean supersymmetry,” arXiv:hep-th/0703037.
[222] L. Andrianopoli, R. D’Auria, S. Ferrara and M. Trigiante, “Black-hole attractors in N = 1 supergrav-
     ity,” arXiv:hep-th/0703178.
[223] K. Saraikin and C. Vafa,         “Non-supersymmetric Black Holes and Topological Strings,”
     arXiv:hep-th/0703214.
[224] L. D’Errico, W. Muck and R. Pettorino, “Stretched Horizon and Entropy of Superstars,”
     arXiv:hep-th/0703223.
[225] M. R. Garousi and A. Ghodsi, “On Attractor Mechanism and Entropy Function for Non-extremal
     Black Holes/Branes,” arXiv:hep-th/0703260.
[226] N. V. Suryanarayana and M. C. Wapler, “Charges from Attractors,” arXiv:0704.0955 [hep-th].
[227] R. G. Cai and L. M. Cao, “On the Entropy Function and the Attractor Mechanism for Spherically
     Symmetric Extremal Black Holes,” arXiv:0704.1239 [hep-th].
[228] O. J. C. Dias and P. J. Silva, “Attractors and the quantum statistical relation for extreme (BPS or
     not) black holes,” arXiv:0704.1405 [hep-th].
[229] B. de Wit, “BPS Black Holes,” arXiv:0704.1452 [hep-th].
[230] K. Hanaki, K. Ohashi and Y. Tachikawa, “Comments on charges and near-horizon data of black rings,”
     arXiv:0704.1819 [hep-th].


                                                   194
[231] M. Guica and A. Strominger, “Cargese lectures on string theory with eight supercharges,”
     arXiv:0704.3295 [hep-th].
[232] A. Castro, J. L. Davis, P. Kraus and F. Larsen, “Precision entropy of spinning black holes,”
     arXiv:0705.1847 [hep-th].
[233] M. R. Garousi and A. Ghodsi, “Entropy function for non-extremal D1D5 and D2D6NS5-branes,”
     arXiv:0705.2149 [hep-th].
[234] J. H. Cho and S. Nam, “Non-supersymmetric Attractor with the Cosmological Constant,” JHEP
     0707, 011 (2007) [arXiv:0705.2892 [hep-th]].
[235] S. Ferrara and A. Marrani, “N=8 non-BPS Attractors, Fixed Scalars and Magic Supergravities,”
     arXiv:0705.3866 [hep-th].
[236] S. Nampuri, P. K. Tripathy and S. P. Trivedi, “On The Stability of Non-Supersymmetric Attractors
     in String Theory,” arXiv:0705.4554 [hep-th].
[237] M. Cvitan, P. D. Prester, S. Pallua and I. Smolic, “Extremal black holes in D=5: SUSY vs. Gauss-
     Bonnet corrections,” arXiv:0706.1167 [hep-th].
[238] S. Ferrara and A. Marrani, “On the Moduli Space of non-BPS Attractors for N=2 Symmetric Mani-
     folds,” arXiv:0706.1667 [hep-th].
[239] D. Astefanesei and H. Yavartanoo, “Stationary black holes and attractor mechanism,” arXiv:0706.1847
     [hep-th].
[240] S. Yun, “Non-Supersymmetric Unattractors in Born-Infeld Black Holes,” arXiv:0706.2046 [hep-th].
[241] A. Misra and P. Shukla, “Area Codes, Large Volume (Non-)Perturbative alpha’- and Instanton -
     Corrected Non-supersymmetric (A)dS minimum, the Inverse Problem and Fake Superpotentials for
     Multiple-Singular-Loci-Two-Parameter Calabi-Yau’s,” arXiv:0707.0105 [hep-th].
[242] A. Ceresole, S. Ferrara and A. Marrani, “4d/5d Correspondence for the Black Hole Potential and its
     Critical Points,” arXiv:0707.0964 [hep-th].
[243] M. M. Anber and D. Kastor, “The Attractor Mechanism in Gauss-Bonnet Gravity,” arXiv:0707.1464
     [hep-th].
[244] S. Bellucci, A. Marrani, E. Orazi and A. Shcherbakov, “Attractors with Vanishing Central Charge,”
     arXiv:0707.2730 [hep-th].
[245] K. Hotta and T. Kubota “Exact Solutions and the Attractor Mechanism in Non-BPS Black Holes,”
     arXiv:0707.4554 [hep-th].
[246] H. Arfaei, R. Fareghbal, “Double Horizon Limit, AdS Geometry and Entropy Function,”
     arXiv:0708.0240 [hep-th].
[247] T. Kawai, Y. Yamada and S. K. Yang, “Elliptic Genera And N=2 Superconformal Field Theory,”
     Nucl. Phys. B 414, 191 (1994) [arXiv:hep-th/9306096].
[248] E. Witten, “Constraints On Supersymmetry Breaking,” Nucl. Phys. B 202, 253 (1982).
[249] W. Lerche, C. Vafa and N. P. Warner, “Chiral Rings in N=2 Superconformal Theories,” Nucl. Phys.
     B 324, 427 (1989).

                                                  195
[250] L. J. Dixon, V. Kaplunovsky and J. Louis, “Moduli Dependence Of String Loop Corrections To Gauge
     Coupling Constants,” Nucl. Phys. B 355, 649 (1991).
[251] J. A. Harvey and G. W. Moore, “Algebras, BPS States, and Strings,” Nucl. Phys. B 463, 315 (1996)
     [arXiv:hep-th/9510182].
[252] T. Kawai, “N = 2 heterotic string threshold correction, K3 surface and generalized Kac-Moody
     superalgebra,” Phys. Lett. B 372, 59 (1996) [arXiv:hep-th/9512046].
[253] C. D. D. Neumann, “The elliptic genus of Calabi-Yau 3-folds and 4-folds, product formulae and
     generalized Kac-Moody algebras,” J. Geom. Phys. 29, 5 (1999) [arXiv:hep-th/9607029].
[254] J. Igusa, On siegel modular varieties of genus two, Amer. J. Math. 84 (1962) 175200.
[255] J. Igusa, On siegel modular varieties of genus two (ii), Amer. J. Math. 86 (1962) 392412.
[256] R. Borcherds, “Automorphic forms on O(s+2,2;R) and infinite products,” Invent. Math. 120 (1995)
     161.
[257] V. A. Gritsenko and V. V. Nikulin, “Siegel automorphic form corrections of some Lorentzian Kac–
     Moody Lie algebras,” Amer. J. Math. 119, 181 (1997) [arXiv:alg-geom/9504006].
[258] T. Ibukiyama, On siegel modular varieties of level 3, Int. J. Math 2(1) (1991) 1735.
[259] S. Hayashida and T. Ibukiyama, Siegel modular forms of half integral weights and a lifting conjecture.,
     Journal of Kyoto Univ 45 (2005).
[260] H. Aoki and T. Ibukiyama, Simple graed rings of siegel modular forms, differential operators and
     borcherds products, International Journal of Mathematics 16 (2005) 249279.
[261] M. Eichler and D. Zagier, The theory of jacobi forms, Birkhauser (1985).
[262] N. -P. Skoruppa, Mathematics of Computation, 58, 381 (1992).
[263] M. Manickam, B. Ramakrishnan and T. C. Vasudevan, Manuscripta Math., 81, 161 (1993).
[264] C. Vafa, Nucl. Phys. B 463, 435 (1996) [arXiv:hep-th/9512078].




                                                    196
