                                                   Cosmic Strings and Superstrings
                                                          By Edmund J. Copeland1 & T. W. B. Kibble2
                                                    1
                                                    School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Nottingham,
                                                      University Park, Nottingham NG7 2RD, United Kingdom
                                            2
                                              Blackett Laboratory, Imperial College, London SW7 2AZ, United Kingdom
                                                             Preprint number: Imperial/TP/09/TK/03
arXiv:0911.1345v3 [hep-th] 26 Nov 2009




                                         Cosmic strings are predicted by many field-theory models, and may have been
                                         formed at a symmetry-breaking transition early in the history of the universe, such
                                         as that associated with grand unification. They could have important cosmological
                                         effects. Scenarios suggested by fundamental string theory or M-theory, in particular
                                         the popular idea of brane inflation, also strongly suggest the appearance of simi-
                                         lar structures. Here we review the reasons for postulating the existence of cosmic
                                         strings or superstrings, the various possible ways in which they might be detected
                                         observationally, and the special features that might discriminate between ordinary
                                         cosmic strings and superstrings.
                                              Keywords: cosmic strings, superstrings, early universe, branes, braneworlds


                                                                              1. Introduction
                                         There are many examples of linear topological defects in low-temperature con-
                                         densed-matter systems, including vortices in superfluid helium and in atomic Bose-
                                         Einstein condensates, and magnetic flux tubes in superconductors. These struc-
                                         tures typically appear when a system goes through a phase transition into a low-
                                         temperature ordered phase in which the underlying symmetry is spontaneously
                                         broken. They arise because in certain circumstances the ordering may be frustrated.
                                             Cosmic strings are analogous objects that may have been formed in the early
                                         universe. They could be produced during one of the early symmetry-breaking phase
                                         transitions predicted by many particle-physics models, for example one associated
                                         with the breaking of a ‘grand unification’ symmetry. Similar point-like or planar
                                         defects — monopoles or domain walls — may also be formed.
                                             Superstrings are the supposed basic constituents of matter in fundamental string
                                         theory or M-theory, which is at present the leading contender as a unified theory
                                         of all particle interactions including gravity.
                                             Both cosmic strings and superstrings are still purely hypothetical objects. There
                                         is no direct empirical evidence for their existence, though there have been some
                                         intriguing observations that were initially thought to provide such evidence, but
                                         are now generally believed to have been false alarms. Nevertheless, there are good
                                         theoretical reasons for believing that these exotic objects do exist, and reasonable
                                         prospects of detecting their existence within the next few years.
                                             Initially, cosmic strings and superstrings were regarded as two completely sepa-
                                         rate classes. Cosmic strings, if they exist, stretch across cosmological distances and
                                         though exceedingly thin are sufficiently massive to have noticeable gravitational
                                         effects. On the other hand superstrings were seen as minute objects, even on the

                                         Article submitted to Royal Society                                          TEX Paper
2                          E. J. Copeland & T. W. B. Kibble


scale of particle physics, far too small to have any directly observable effects. But
in the last few years it has emerged that under certain circumstances they too can
grow to macroscopic size and play the same role as cosmic strings. Indeed, it is
now very possible that observations of a cosmic superstring might provide the first
real direct evidence for M-theory. (For reviews see Polchinski 2005, Davis & Kibble
2005, Sakellariadou 2009, Myers & Wyman 2009.)
    We begin, in Section 2, by describing the simplest examples of cosmic strings,
which arise in the breaking of an abelian U(1) symmetry, and discuss the reasons
for thinking that cosmic strings might appear during phase transitions in the very
early history of the universe, in a process closely analogous to what happens when
a superfluid or superconductor is cooled rapidly through its transition temperature.
In Section 3 we review the dynamics of cosmic strings, and in Section 4, discuss how
a network of cosmic strings, once formed, would evolve as the universe expands.
    In Section 5, we review the ideas behind fundamental superstring theory and
the characteristics of the five known consistent superstring theories. In all five cases,
consistency requires a spacetime of ten rather than four dimensions. A mechanism
is therefore required to reduce the number of dimensions of our spacetime to the
familiar four. One such is the Kaluza–Klein mechanism of compactification: the
unobserved dimensions are in fact curled up so small as to be unobservable on
ordinary scales. Another idea, the brane-world mechanism, has emerged more re-
cently. A key feature of superstring theories is the appearance of branes, surfaces
of various dimensions embedded in the larger spacetime. A p-brane is a surface of
spatial dimension p, or spacetime dimension p+1. The basic idea of the brane world
is that all the constituents of our universe are bound to a 3-brane that can move
within the larger nine-dimensional space; they in fact consist of short segments of
fundamental string with their ends firmly rooted on the brane.
    In Sections 6-8, we explain why the initial rejection of the idea of cosmic su-
perstrings has been overturned by showing how they can have sufficiently small
tensions, survive a period of inflation and be cosmologically stable, and use a series
of models to demonstrate the point, using them to also demonstrate the similari-
ties and differences between these cosmic superstrings and ordinary cosmic strings
(often called solitonic strings). One particularly important difference, discussed in
Section 9, lies in the probability of ‘intercommuting’ or exchange of partners when
strings cross, and also in the possibility of forming three-string junctions. The ob-
servational signatures of the different types of strings are the subject of Section 10,
where we also discuss the current observational bounds on their existence.
    Our conclusions are summarized in Section 11.


                                     2. Cosmic strings
A key feature of particle physics over the last few decades has been the search
for unification. A cornerstone of the currently accepted Standard Model is the elec-
troweak theory which provides a unified description of the weak and electromagnetic
interactions, and for which Glashow, Salam and Weinberg shared the 1979 Nobel
Prize for Physics. It is a gauge theory based on the symmetry group SU(2)×U(1).
At high energies, this symmetry is manifest, but at energies below a few hundred
GeV, it is hidden, broken spontaneously down to the residual U(1) subgroup rep-
resenting electromagnetic gauge transformations. Of the four gauge bosons in the

Article submitted to Royal Society
                                        Cosmic Strings                                3



                                            V




                                                         Im φ
                                 Re φ

                             Figure 1. The sombrero potential.


theory, the three that mediate weak interactions, the W ± and Z 0 , acquire a mass
of order 100 GeV, while the fourth, the photon, remains massless.
    There is good reason to believe that some kind of unification occurs at a much
higher energy scale between the strong interactions and the electroweak ones. The
coupling ‘constants’ do in fact vary slowly with energy, and all of them approxi-
mately converge to a common value at high energy. The convergence is much more
precise in the minimal supersymmetric extension of the Standard Model, provided
that supersymmetry breaking occurs at a fairly low energy, around 1 TeV. Then
all the couplings coverge at a grand unification scale somewhere in the region of
1016 GeV (Amaldi et al 1992). Several grand unified theories (GUTs) have been
proposed, in which some larger symmetry group G would be effective at extremely
high energies, but is spontaneously broken at the GUT scale down to the symme-
try group of the Standard Model, namely SU(3)×SU(2)×U(1), where the SU(3)
is the symmetry group of quantum chromodynamics, which describes the strong
interactions, and SU(2)×U(1) is the electroweak group.
    Spontaneously broken gauge theories such as these often exhibit stable topologi-
cal defects — domain walls, cosmic strings or monopoles. (See Jeanerrot et al 2003.)
The simplest model in which cosmic strings arise is a U(1) gauge theory, involving
a complex scalar field interacting with the electromagnetic field and described by
the Lagrangian density
                           L = Dµ φ∗ Dµ φ − 14 Fµν F µν − V (φ).                  (2.1)
Here the covariant derivative and electromagnetic field are Dµ φ = ∂µ φ + ieAµ φ
and Fµν = ∂µ Aν − ∂ν Aµ , V (φ) is the sombrero potential V = 12 λ(φ∗ φ − 21 η 2 )2 , in
which λ and η are positive constants (see Fig. 1), and we use natural units with
c = ~ = kB = 1. This model is invariant under the local U(1) gauge transformations
                               φ(x)   φ(x)eiα(x) ,
                                        →
                                                1
                        Aµ (x) → Aµ (x) − ∂µ α(x).                               (2.2)
                                                e
  At high temperatures, there will be large fluctuations of φ around a zero average.
However, when the temperature falls below a critical value Tc of order η, φ will tend

Article submitted to Royal Society
4                          E. J. Copeland & T. W. B. Kibble


to settle down into the valley of the potential. At zero temperature, we expect hφi =
ηeiα with arbitrary phase angle α. The theory thus exhibits spontaneous symmetry
breaking: when the temperature falls below Tc , the field φ must randomly choose
a phase angle. Moreover this choice may be made differently in widely separated
regions, so the field may be frustrated from reaching the minimum everywhere. In
particular, if around a large loop α varies by 2π then somewhere within that loop,
φ must vanish; the locus of such points is a cosmic string.
    A straight cosmic string along the z-axis is a solution of the form (Nielsen &
Olesen 1973)
                                                  η
                               φ(t, z, ρ, ϕ) =   √ f (ρ)einϕ ,
                                                   2
                                                   n
                             Aµ (t, z, ρ, ϕ) =   − h(ρ)∂µ ϕ,                     (2.3)
                                                   e
where we use cylindrical polar coordinates. The functions f and h are determined
by minimizing the energy subject to the boundary conditions

                  f (0) = 0, f (∞) = 1,      h(0) = 0, h(∞) = 1.                 (2.4)

(See for example Hindmarsh & Kibble 1994, Vilenkin & Shellard 1994).
    The solution with n = ±1 is stable for topological reasons, because around a
circle at infinity the phase of φ changes by 2π, so φ follows√ an incontractible path
on the manifold of minima of V , namely the circle |φ| = η/ 2. For these relativistic
strings, the energy per unit length is equal to the string tension µ, which is related
to the scale η by
                                     µ = F (β)η 2 ,                              (2.5)
where F is a function of order 1 of the ratio β between the gauge and scalar
couplings, which also turns out to be the ratio between the squared masses of the
vector and scalar particles:
                                       e2   m2
                                  β=      = v2 .                            (2.6)
                                       λ    ms
    More generally, consider a theory with gauge symmetry group G involving a
multiplet φ of scalar fields, where the Lagrangian is invariant under transforma-
tions of the form φ(x) → U (x)φ(x) for any U ∈ G (together with appropriate
transformations of the gauge fields). In the vacuum state, the expectation value
h0|φ(x)|0i = φ0 , say, must lie on the manifold M on which √ the potential V (φ)
takes its minimum value (analogous to the circle |φ| = η/ 2 above). In general,
the symmetry is spontaneously broken, but only partially. The unbroken symmetry
subgroup H is the stability group of φ0 , namely

                                H = {U ∈ G : U φ0 = φ0 }.                        (2.7)

The degenerate minima, the points of M, are labelled by the left cosets of H in G.
Equivalently, M may be identified with the quotient space

                                       M = G/H,                                  (2.8)

whose elements are precisely these cosets.

Article submitted to Royal Society
                                     Cosmic Strings                                  5


    It is the topology of this manifold M that determines whether or not topological
defects such as cosmic strings can appear (see for example Kibble 2000). When the
system cools below the relevant symmetry-breaking scale the value of φ will tend
to settle down everywhere towards some point on the manifold M, but the choice
of point may vary from place to place, and will be made independently in widely
separated regions, so the symmetry breaking may be frustrated. In particular, cos-
mic strings are found if and only there are incontractible loops within M, i.e. if M
is not simply connected, or equivalently if its fundamental group or first homotopy
group is non-trivial: π1 (M) 6= 1 (1 is the group comprising the identity only). In
that case, if the values of φ around some loop in space follow an incontractible loop
in M then in the interior of the loop φ must leave the manifold M; a cosmic string,
or strings, must pass through the loop.
    In such a case, the topologically inequivalent classes of cosmic string are classi-
fied by the elements of the fundamental group. For the simple case of the breaking
of U(1) down to 1, M is a circle S 1 , and the fundamental group is the group of
integers, π1 (M) = Z. Here the possible strings are labelled by an integer, the wind-
ing number ; for a typical string of winding number n, the phase of φ around the
string is α = nϕ. What this analysis does not tell us is whether all these strings
are stable. The n = 1 string is always stable, but for higher values of n it may
be energetically favourable for a string with winding number n to break up into n
separate strings of winding number 1. As a matter of fact, whether this is so or not
depends on the parameter β defined in (2.6). If β > 1, strings with all values of n
are stable; if β < 1, only the n = ±1 strings are stable. This is the same distinction
as that between Type-I and Type-II superconductors.
    It is also possible to have strings in theories with no gauge field, where the
symmetry is global rather than a local, gauge symmetry as in (2.2). These are
called global, as opposed to local, strings, and have rather different properties. We
shall not consider them further here.
    In many models of unification the symmetry group G is simple or semi-simple.
In such cases, the fundamental group π1 (M) is always a finite group. For example,
suppose that φ is a traceless symmetric tensor under√SO(3), belonging to the five-
dimensional j = 2 representation, and that φ0 = (η/ 6)diag(−1, −1, 2). Then it is
easy to see that H = O(2), and one finds that π1 (M) = Z2 , the group of integers
modulo 2. In this case, there is only one non-trivial class of cosmic string.
    Very similar criteria determine whether or not other types of topological defects
can exist. Domain walls exist if the manifold M is not connected, i.e. if π0 (M) 6= 1,
while monopoles exist if there are incontractible 2-surfaces, i.e. if π2 (M) 6= 1.


                              3. Dynamics of strings
Let us suppose there is symmetry breaking at some large energy scale η, and that
the topological condition for the formation of strings, π1 (M) 6= 1, is satisfied. Then
when the universe cools through this temperature, the result will be a random
tangle of cosmic strings, characterized by some characteristic distance ξ between
them. (Some authors use the symbol L for ξ.)
    Relativistic strings of the simplest type are characterized by the fact that in the
string rest-frame, the energy per unit length is equal to the string tension µ, given
by (2.5). We shall always use ‘length’ of string to mean the invariant length, the

Article submitted to Royal Society
6                          E. J. Copeland & T. W. B. Kibble


energy divided by µ. The characteristic scale ξ may be defined by saying that in
a randomly chosen large cube of size ξ 3 , the average total length of string is ξ, or
equivalently the mean energy density in strings is
                                                  µ
                                         ρstr =      .                              (3.1)
                                                  ξ2
    For reasons of causality, the choice among the degenerate minima will be made
independently in widely separated regions; the choices cannot be correlated over
distances larger than the causal horizon distance (Kibble 1976), which in the early
universe is comparable with its age t. (For example, in a radiation-dominated uni-
verse, it is 2t.) This puts a lower limit on the initial density of cosmic strings: ξ . t,
and in fact we might expect that ξ would substantially smaller, because the rele-
vant causal processes do not date back as far as the Big Bang; this is confirmed by
simulations of string formation.                                                 √
    Because cosmic strings are so thin (with widths of order 1/ms = 1/( λη) or
1/mv = 1/(eη)) their large-scale dynamics in an otherwise empty or low-density
universe is very well described by the Nambu-Goto action, a zero-width approxi-
mation. The spacetime coordinates of points on the string are xµ (σ a ), where σ a
(a = 0, 1) are two world-sheet coordinates, and the action is required to be invari-
ant under arbitrary reparametrizations σ a → σ a′ . In fact the Nambu-Goto action
is simply proportional to the area of the world-sheet:
                                    Z      q
                           S = −µ d2 σ − det(gµν xµ,a xν,b ),                        (3.2)

in which gµν is the spacetime metric and xµ,a = ∂xµ /∂σ a .
   It is often convenient to choose one of the world-sheet coordinates to be the
global time coordinate: τ = σ 0 = x0 . In Minkowski space, the other coordinate
σ = σ 1 may be chosen to satisfy also the ‘conformal gauge’ conditions

                              ẋ2 + (x′ )2 = 0,          ẋ · x′ = 0,               (3.3)

where ẋ = ∂x/∂τ and x′ = ∂x/∂σ, or equivalently in terms of three-vectors

                              ẋ2 + (x′ )2 = 1,          ẋ · x′ = 0.               (3.4)

Then it turns out that the Nambu-Goto equation of motion is just the two-dimen-
sional wave equation,
                                  ẍ = x′′ .                               (3.5)
So in this case the general solution is easy to write down; it is a linear superposition
of left-moving and right-moving waves, each moving along the string with the speed
of light:
                          x(τ, σ) = 12 [a(σ + τ ) + b(σ − τ )],                    (3.6)
where to satisfy (3.4) both a′ and b′ must be unit vectors,

                                       a′2 = b′2 = 1.                               (3.7)

   In an expanding (spatially flat) Friedmann-Lemaı̂tre-Robertson-Walker space-
time, with metric
                            ds2 = a2 (τ )(dτ 2 − dx2 ),                   (3.8)

Article submitted to Royal Society
                                     Cosmic Strings                                    7




                                                         or


                                               (a)                   (b)
                          Figure 2. Intercommuting of two strings.


these conditions are no longer compatible. It is still possible to impose the ‘trans-
verse gauge’ condition ẋ · x′ = 0, but then the quantity
                                            r
                                                x′2
                                  ǫ(τ, σ) =           ,                         (3.9)
                                              1 − ẋ2
is no longer a constant, and the equations take the more complicated form
                                                     ′
                                ȧ      2      1 1 ′
                          ẍ + 2 (1 − ẋ ) =         x ,                  (3.10)
                                a              ǫ ǫ
                                                  ȧ
                                          ǫ̇ = −2 ǫẋ2 .
                                                  a
These equations do not have non-trivial exact solutions but are still numerically
tractable. Here too the motion can be thought of as a superposition of left and right
moving waves. The analogues of a′ and −b′ are the unit vectors

                           p = ẋ + ǫ−1 x′ ,     q = ẋ − ǫ−1 x′ .                (3.11)

The difference is that now the left- and right-movers do interact. It is useful to intro-
duce a null world-sheet coordinate u constant along the left-moving null geodesics,
i.e. u̇ = ǫ−1 u′ , and to regard p as a function of τ and u (and similarly q as a
function of τ and v, where v̇ = −ǫ−1 v ′ ). Then one finds that the dependence of p, q
on τ is slow: they satisfy the equations of motion
                                          ȧ
                            ∂τ p(τ, u) = − [q − (p · q)p],                        (3.12)
                                          a
                                          ȧ
                            ∂τ q(τ, v) = − [p − (p · q)q]                         (3.13)
                                          a
Note that p is nearly constant along a left-moving null geodesic; the characteristic
time for change with τ is the Hubble time.
    There is however one question the Nambu-Goto equations cannot answer: what
happens when two strings (or two segments of the same string) meet? For the
simplest types of string, two outcomes are possible (see Fig. 2): (a) the strings
might pass through one another, or (b) they might exchange partners, a process
often called intercommuting. Field theory simulations of simple models have shown
that cosmic strings almost always choose the second alternative (Shellard 1987,
Matzner 1989); the probability of intercommuting is 1 except perhaps when the
relative velocity of the two strings is very close to the speed of light (Hanany &
Hamimoto 2005, Achúcarro & De Putter 2006, Eto et al 2006).

Article submitted to Royal Society
8                          E. J. Copeland & T. W. B. Kibble



                      m                  m                m
                                                        or       m–n
                       n                     m+n
                                         n
                                                             n

                       Figure 3. Junctions formed by Type-I strings.


    However there are types of string for which other possibilities exist. For example,
for Type-I strings, where there are stable solutions with higher winding numbers,
three-string junctions can form (Bettencourt & Kibble 1994). When strings of wind-
ing numbers m and n meet, they can zip together to create a third string of winding
number m ± n (see Fig. 3). There are in this case kinematic constraints on which of
these possibilities is realized (see Copeland et al 2007). As is discussed later, some
cosmic superstrings also exhibit this possibility. Even when they are not junction-
forming, the probability of intercommuting of superstrings is often much less than
unity.
    A particularly interesting situation occurs if π1 (M) is a non-abelian group, such
as the quaternion group, of order 8. Here too there can be three-string junctions.
It turns out that strings labelled by non-commuting elements of π1 (M) may zip
together but cannot simply pass through one another without becoming joined by
a third string, labelled by the commutator.


                      4. Evolution of a string network
Now let us consider what happens to a tangle of cosmic strings once formed by
early symmetry breaking. Initially, at least in most scenarios, just after the time
of formation, the universe will be dense, with an energy density only slightly less
than that inside the strings, so their motion will be heavily damped. If it were not
for the universal expansion, for energetic reasons, the total length of string would
tend to decrease as kinks become straightened under the effect of string tension.
From time to time, strings would meet and intercommute, forming new kinks that
straighten out in turn. On the other hand, the effect of expansion will be to cause
the strings to lengthen. It can be shown that during this initial friction-dominated
regime, the characteristic scale of the tangle will increase with time as ξ ∝ t5/4 , so
ξ grows slightly faster than the Hubble radius (Kibble 1982).
    Clearly this process cannot continue indefinitely. For reasons of causality, ξ can
never exceed the causal horizon distance, of order t. In fact, the friction ceases to
be important when the typical damping time exceeds ξ, and this also occurs when
γ = ξ/t has become roughly of order 1. Thereafter, the strings move freely, and
are well described by the Nambu-Goto action,√      reaching relativistic speeds — in
Minkowski space, the r.m.s. velocity is 1/ 2, though in the expanding universe it
is somewhat less. There is now general agreement from several simulations, as well
as theoretical analyses, that the string network will reach a scaling regime in which
the ratio γ = ξ/t remains nearly constant. Estimates of this constant are typically
of order 0.3 and 0.55 in the radiation- and matter-dominated eras respectively.
Equivalently, using (3.1), and remembering that the total energy density of the

Article submitted to Royal Society
                                     Cosmic Strings                                    9


universe ρ also behaves as ρ ∝ 1/t2 , we see that in the scaling regime the energy
density in strings remains a fixed fraction of the total energy density: if a(t) ∝ tν
(ν = 21 or 32 in the radiation or matter era) then

                               ρstr   8πGµ ξ 2   8πGµγ 2
                                    =          =         ,                         (4.1)
                                ρ      3ν 2 t2     3ν 2

a constant of order Gµ, where G is Newton’s constant. This dimensionless number
Gµ is of paramount importance in determining the observational effects of cosmic
strings.
    Any comoving volume in the universe is growing as V ∝ a3 ∝ t3ν . If the strings
were fixed in comoving coordinates and just being stretched by expansion, we would
have ξ ∝ a or ρstr ∝ t−2ν ; strings would then eventually dominate the energy density
of the universe. Clearly, therefore, maintenance of the scaling regime requires some
mechanism for removing energy from the tangle of strings. It is widely believed that
the formation of closed loops plays a key role, but the questions of how large those
loops typically are and of the role of small-scale structure on the strings are still
controversial. This is a reflection of the fact that these questions involve such wide
ranges of length and time scales that they are hard to deal with numerically.
    When a string crosses itself, intercommutation can lead to the formation of a
closed loop. Isolated loops oscillate quasi-periodically, with a period equal to half the
length l of the loop. If the loop is large (l & ξ) then it is very likely to meet another
piece of string and reconnect to the long-string network. It may also intersect itself
and break up into smaller loops, but if it survives then after a few oscillation periods
we will be left with one or more long-lived loops, which oscillate and lose energy
very gradually, by gravitational or other radiation. It was initially assumed that
the typical size of the loops lost to the network would be comparable to ξ. But
most of the early simulations of evolution using the Nambu-Goto equations found
only very small loops with a typical size l ≪ ξ (Bennett & Bouchet 1990, Allen &
Shellard 1990).
    In estimating the likely observational effects of cosmic strings, a very important
parameter is the typical size l of the loops. This view that l/t becomes very small
has been supported by some recent high-resolution simulations (Martins & Shellard
2006, Ringeval et al 2007). They suggest that the typical value of l may actually be
nearly constant, determined primarily by the initial conditions. Other recent work,
however, has suggested that there are two distinct families of loops, and that in
addition to the very tiny loops a population of large loops will eventually appear
(Vanchurin et al 2006, Polchinski & Rocha 2007, Vanchurin 2008, Dubath et al
2008), typically with l/t ∼ 0.1. None of the simulations as yet covers a long enough
period of time to be absolutely sure whether this is true. It is very important to
resolve this issue.
    It has often been suggested that the small-scale structure on cosmic strings
and the typical size of loop are determined by the effects of gravitational radiation.
However, the work of Siemens & Olum (2001) has shown that gravitational radiation
is much less efficient than had been thought, essentially because waves travelling in
one direction do not interact strongly with all those in the opposite direction, but
only those with a similar wavelength. This implies that the loops will be smaller
than earlier discussions had suggested.

Article submitted to Royal Society
10                         E. J. Copeland & T. W. B. Kibble


   The lifetime tl of a loop decaying by gravitational radiation will be roughly
proportional to its size l. The original estimate (Vachaspati & Vilenkin 1985) was
that
                                             l
                                      tl ≈     ,                              (4.2)
                                           ΓGµ
where Γ is a numerical factor depending on the shape, but not the size, of the loop,
typically of order 102 . But in some case, the lifetime may be substantially larger
than this estimate.
    There is also debate about whether gravitational radiation is indeed the primary
energy-loss mechanism. It has been suggested (Vincent et al 1998, Hindmarsh et
al 2009) that the strings lose energy mainly by radiating other kinds of particles,
associated with the gauge and scalar fields. This too is an issue that needs to be
resolved.
    One reason for the production of small loops is that there is a great deal of
small-scale structure on the strings. Every time two strings meet and exchange
partners, a pair of kinks is created on each of the strings, that propagate away from
each other at the speed of light. These kinks persist during the later evolution. The
kink angle decreases, very slowly, due to the effect of stretching. It is difficult to
obtain information about this from the simulations, because the scales in question
are close to the resolution limit. Early analytic studies (Kibble & Copeland 1991,
Austin et al 1995, Martins & Shellard 1996) gave a good account of large-scale
structure but were less successful on small scales. However, considerable progress
has been made recently in understanding the nature of the small-scale structure. It
is useful to discuss the correlation function

                   z(s, t) ≡ hp(τ, u1 ) · p(τ, u2 )i,     s = aǫ(u1 − u2 ),      (4.3)

where the angle-brackets denote an ensemble average, and t is the physical time
defined by dt = a(τ )dτ . On most scales of observational significance, the small-scale
structure does reach a scaling regime, in which

                                     z(s, t) = 1 − A(s/t)2χ ,                    (4.4)

where A and χ are constants (Polchinski & Rocha 2006). On very small scales, where
s is so small that at most one kink is likely to be found on the string segment, there
is a non-scaling regime (Copeland & Kibble 2009). However as the number of kinks
grows, the range of values of s/t where this non-scaling applies shrinks with time.

                             5. Cosmic superstrings
String theory is based on the idea that the fundamental constituents of matter
are not point particles but tiny strings, either open or closed (forming loops). (For
an introduction, see Polchinski 1998, Becker et al 2007). The theory can only be
made consistent in a spacetime of more than the familiar four dimensions — 26 for
bosonic strings or 10 for superstrings which incorporate supersymmetry, connecting
bosons and fermions. There are five known consistent superstring theories. Type I
is a theory of unoriented strings, while those of Type II are oriented; there are two
distinct Type II theories, IIA and IIB, with differing symmetry properties. Finally
we have heterotic strings which are also oriented, and involve a curious combination

Article submitted to Royal Society
                                     Cosmic Strings                                    11


of a left-moving bosonic string and a right-moving superstring; there are two such
theories, based on the symmetry groups E8 ×E8 and SO(32) respectively.
    One way of reducing the number of dimensions to the four we observe is the
Kaluza-Klein mechanism, in which it is assumed that the remaining six dimensions
are compactified, curled up to a small size, for example forming a loop of small
radius R, just as a drinking straw appears one-dimensional when viewed on a large
scale, though it is fundamentally two-dimensional.
    Many remarkable duality relations have been established between these different
superstring theories, for example a T -duality which relates a IIA theory compact-
ified on a scale R and a IIB theory compactified on a scale ls2 /R, where ls is the
fundamental string scale, related to the Planck length, as well as S-duality between
theories with string coupling constant gs and 1/gs . As a result, it has been estab-
lished that all five superstring theories are limiting cases, in different regions of
parameter space, of a single underlying 11-dimensional theory, called M-theory. So
too is the maximal 11-dimensional supergravity theory, the supersymmetric exten-
sion of general relativity in 11 dimensions.
    More recently, a different mechanism for recovering the observed four dimensions
has emerged, the brane-world mechanism, which is set in the context of Type-IIB
string theory. Branes are surfaces of various dimensions embedded in the larger
spacetime. A p-brane is a surface of spatial dimension p, or spacetime dimension
p + 1. Thus a 1-brane is a string, which sweeps out a two-dimensional world sheet
in spacetime; a 2-brane is a membrane (hence the name), sweeping out a three-
dimensional world volume; and so on. In particular, there are Dirichlet branes (or
D-branes); fundamental strings (F-strings) may either form closed loops or be open-
ended; a Dp-brane is a ((p + 1)-dimensional) surface on which the fundamental
strings can terminate. A D1-brane is called a D-string. One important distinction
between the two Type-II string theories is that stable Dp-branes exist with even
p in Type IIA, and for odd p in Type IIB. Dp-branes are generally coupled to
(p + 1)-form fields and carry corresponding fluxes.
    The essence of the brane-world mechanism is that all the constituents of our
universe are bound to a 3-brane that can move within the larger nine-dimensional
space; they in fact consist of short segments of fundamental string with their ends
firmly rooted on the brane. This applies to all the particles of the Standard Model,
including photons, so we cannot see beyond our 3-brane, but it does not apply to
gravitons, which correspond to closed string loops. This means that gravity can leak
away from our brane, giving rise to possible observable deviations from Newtonian
gravity on large scales.
    In addition to F-strings and D-branes, other similar objects exist in M-theory,
Neveu-Schwarz- (NS-)branes and M-branes.
    The ideas of cosmic strings and superstrings emerged at about the same time,
but were initially unrelated. The first person to ask whether superstrings might
be stretched to cosmic size and play the role of cosmic strings was Witten (1985).
His answer was in the negative, for several reasons. First the string energy scale
is close to the Planck energy, and so the superstring tension µ would be too high:
          −3                                                                −5
Gµ > ∼ 10    , while it was clear even then that for cosmic strings Gµ <
                                                                       ∼ 10    , otherwise
they would generate excessively large perturbations. Secondly, any period of infla-
tion would have diluted the numbers of pre-existing cosmic strings or superstrings
to an unobservable level; only strings formed after or at the end of inflation could


Article submitted to Royal Society
12                         E. J. Copeland & T. W. B. Kibble




                                                                image throat
         D3       D3                      O3
                                                  Z2

                                     Calabi-Yau


Figure 4. Schematic picture of the K LM MT geometry: a warped Calabi-Yau manifold with
             throats, identified under a Z2 orientifold (Copeland et al 2004).



be observationally relevant. Moreover, macroscopic Type-I strings would break up
on a stringy time scale, and so would not form. Macroscopic heterotic strings al-
ways appear as boundaries of axion domain walls, whose tension would force the
strings to collapse rather than grow to cosmic scales (Vilenkin & Everett 1982). At
the time of Witten’s work no instability of long Type-II strings was known, but
it is now understood that Neveu-Schwarz 5-brane instantons (in combination with
supersymmetry breaking to lift the zero modes) will produce an axion potential
and so lead to domain walls (Becker et al 1995).
     There was a dramatic change, however, after the ‘second string revolution’
around 1995. As we shall explain in the following sections, under the right con-
ditions all these objections have disappeared.


                                6. The tension issue
Two developments have made it possible to envisage strings with much lower ten-
sions, compatible with observational limits on Gµ: large compact dimensions and
warping. These ideas are illustrated by two specific models. (For a review see Myers
& Wyman 2009.)

                           (a) Warping — the K
                                             KLM
                                               MT model
    The idea of warping, in which distances in the physical 4D spacetime are scaled
by a warp factor depending on position in the internal space was first embodied in
the model of Randall & Sundrum (1999, 1999a). Perhaps the model that has proven
to be the best test bed for cosmic superstrings is that developed by Kachru et al
(2003a), and commonly referred to as the K    KLM
                                                MT model. Initially introduced as a
way of realising inflation in string theory (Kachru et al 2003) in a framework where
all the moduli (the parameters defining the characteristics of the internal compact
space) are stabilised (Giddings et al 2002), the formation of cosmic superstrings at
the end of inflation provides an exciting additional feature.
    The KKLM MT model is based on IIB string theory compactified on a Calabi-
Yau manifold (illustrated schematically in Fig. 4). This is orientifolded by a Z2

Article submitted to Royal Society
                                     Cosmic Strings                                   13


symmetry (i.e., points related by this symmetry are identified, with singularities at
its isolated fixed points). The spacetime metric is warped, i.e., the metric of the
physical four-dimensional spacetime is scaled by a factor depending on the position
in the internal space:

                             ds2 = e2A(x⊥ ) ηµν dxµ dxν + ds2⊥ ,                   (6.1)

where x⊥ denotes the coordinates in the compact space.
    Inflation is normally driven by a slowly varying scalar inflaton field, whose po-
tential energy is dominant during the process. In the K     KLMMT model the inflaton
field is the separation between a D3-brane and a D3- (anti-D3)-brane, whose even-
tual annihilation when the separation vanishes leads to reheating. The annihilation
occurs in a region of large gravitational redshift, called the throat, at the bottom
of which A attains its minimum value, min{eA(x⊥ ) } = eA0 ≪ 1, say, where eA(x⊥ )
is normalized to be O(1) in the bulk of the Calabi-Yau. Note that in Fig. 4 the
covering manifold has two throats which are identified under the Z2 rather than a
single throat identified with itself; thus there is no fixed point of the orientifold in
the throat.
    The redshift in the throat plays a key role: both the inflationary scale and the
scale of string tension, as measured by a ten-dimensional inertial observer, are set by
string physics and are close to the four-dimensional Planck scale. The corresponding
energy scales as measured by a four-dimensional physicist are then suppressed by
a factor of eA0 .
    It is expected that the only objects that will be produced in any significant num-
bers will be one-dimensional objects in the noncompact dimensions lying entirely
within the region of reheating (Jones et al 2002, 2003, Sarangi et al 2002). The
obvious candidates are then the F1-brane (fundamental IIB string) and D1-brane,
localized in the throat. There is also another apparent possibility, which however can
be quickly disposed of. In the K  KLM MT model, the throat has a Klebanov-Strassler
(KS) geometry (Klebanov & Strassler 2000), whose cross section is topologically
S 2 × S 3 . A D3-brane wrapped on the S 2 also gives a string in four dimensions.
However, the S 2 collapses to a point at the bottom of the throat, and so this string
can break rapidly into small pieces. The stability of the F- and D-strings will be
discussed in Section 8.
    Finally a caveat about the model we have been discussing. It should satisfy a
number of nontrivial constraints, including stability of the weak scale, stability of
the moduli during inflation, and sufficient reheating. The K    KLMMT model appears
to have a fatal problem with reheating related to the fact that there is a U (1)
gauge field on the stabilizing D3. Being the only massless degree of freedom in the
inflationary throat, it is the only one that couples directly to the inflationary fields.
Then almost all of the energy at reheating goes into these U (1) gauge bosons rather
than into the Standard-Model fields. So this is not a fully satisfactory model. This
isn’t our main concern here; rather we have been attempting to show how strings
can form. There are in fact more general constructions in which the problematic
features of the K KLM MT model are absent. For example, the role of the D3-branes
is to break supersymmetry, raising the supersymmetric anti-de Sitter vacuum to a
state of approximately zero cosmological constant, but there are other dynamical
mechanisms that would accomplish the same thing. Similarly, there need not be an

Article submitted to Royal Society
14                         E. J. Copeland & T. W. B. Kibble


associated U (1) field in general, thereby eliminating the immediate problem with
reheating.

                               (b) Large dimension models
     In the early days of string theory, the only types of compactification that were
seriously considered involved Calabi-Yau or orbifold compactifications (see Polchin-
ski 1998 and Becker et al 2007) where the size of the internal space was of the order
ls , but later the possibility emerged that the extra compact dimensions could be
large (Arkani-Hamed et al 1998,1999, Antoniadis et al 1998). Now Rin a Kaluza-
Klein reduction, integrating the Einstein-Hilbert action (1/16πG10 ) d10 x R over
the six internal dimensions yields a relation between the 10- and 4-dimensional
Newton constants G10 and G4 , namely G10 = V6 G4 , where V6 is the volume of the
six internal compact dimensions. For Type-II strings, 16πG10 = (2π)7 gs2 ls8 (Polchin-
                                                                                     √
ski 1998, Becker et al 2007). Thus the four-dimensional Planck length lPl = G4
                                                                     2
is not fundamental, rather it is related to the string length ls by lPl ∼ gs2 (ls6 /V6 )ls2 .
Thus when V6 ≫ ls6 the four-dimensional Planck length is much smaller than the
                                                                                      2
string length, whence the fundamental string tension is much smaller than 1/lPl         :
                                                       
                                    1      1      1 V6 1
                            µfun ∼ 2 ≪ 2 ∼                   .                       (6.2)
                                   ls     lPl    gs2 ls6 ls2
    As yet no model involving large extra dimensions exists in which all moduli
are stabilized, but it is still possible to investigate the stability of potential cosmic
strings by first of all fixing the moduli by hand. When this is done, a rich spectrum
of strings is found depending on the compactification scenario. In Sections 7 and 8
below we will show how specific models of large extra dimensions can also lead to
successful scenarios of inflation followed by the production of cosmic superstrings,
with correspondingly small string tensions satisfying (8.2) (Jones et al (2002,2003),
Sarangi & Tye (2002), Majumdar & Davis 2002).

                        (c) Strings from low-energy field theory
     There is always the possibility that our vacuum is well described by weakly cou-
pled heterotic string theory and that braneworlds have played a minor role in reach-
ing that position. If that were the case, we would expect that inflation and cosmic
strings would have emerged out of the effective low-energy field theory (low, that
is, in comparison to the Planck scale), with the possible strings forming including
magnetic as well as electric flux tubes, the latter existing in strongly coupled con-
fined theories (Witten 1985). For example, Jeannerot et al (2003) have shown that
within the framework of Supersymmetric Grand Unified Theories (SUSY GUTs),
cosmic strings are generically formed at the end of an inflationary era, providing a
concrete realisation of how strings and inflation could co-exist in realistic particle
physics inspired models. (For a nice review of cosmic strings arising from GUT
theories see Sakellariadou (2009)).

                               7. The inflation issue
A number of models have been proposed in which strings are formed at the end
of a period of early-universe inflation. In D-brane inflation scenarios (Dvali &Tye

Article submitted to Royal Society
                                     Cosmic Strings                                 15


1999, Burgess et al 2001, Alexander 2002, Dvali et al 2001) terminated by collisions
between D3-branes and D3-branes, D-strings are formed (Burgess et al 2001). This
is a special case of the production of strings during hybrid inflation (Yokoyama
1989, Kofman et al 1996). Jones et al (2002,2003) and Sarangi & Tye (2002) ar-
gued that these scenarios lead to the copious production of D-branes that are one-
dimensional in the noncompact directions, and made the important observation that
zero-dimensional defects (monopoles) and two-dimensional defects (domain walls)
are not produced; either of these would have led to severe cosmological difficulties.
    The reheating process during D3-D3 annihilation can be described by a tachyon
field (one whose potential has a maximum at the origin, so that it starts to grow
exponentially). The D1-branes can be regarded as topological defects in this tachyon
field (Sen 1999), and so these will be produced by the Kibble mechanism (Kibble
1976). The F-strings do not have a classical description in these same variables,
but in an S-dual description they are topological defects and so must be produced
in the same way, implying that both D-strings and F-strings are expected to be
produced at the end of brane inflation (Copeland et al 2004, Dvali & Vilenkin 2003,
2004). Of course, only one of the S-dual descriptions can be quantitatively valid,
and if the string coupling is of order one then neither is. However, the argument
depends only on causality, so it is plausible that it is valid for both kinds of string
in all regimes. All strings created at the end of inflation are at the bottom of the
inflationary throat, and they remain there because they are in a deep potential
well: their effective four-dimensional tension µ depends on the warp factor at their
location and their ten-dimensional tension µ̄ as

                                     µ = e2A(x⊥ ) µ̄ .                           (7.1)

    Although only two types of string are produced, we end up with a much richer
spectrum of string types (unlike conventional abelian cosmic strings), because when
a D-string meets an F-string it can bind together rather than intercommute. In
other words they can merge to form a bound state known as a (1, 1)-string. Further
binding leads to the formation of higher bound states, generally known as (p, q)-
strings, which are composed of p F-strings and q D-strings where p and q are
relatively prime integers. They were originally found (Schwarz 1995, Harvey &
Strominger 1995) using the SL(2, Z) duality of the IIB superstring theory and are
now interpreted as bound states of p F1-branes and q D1-branes (Polchinski 1995,
Witten 1996). Their tension in the ten-dimensional Type-IIB theory is (Schwarz
1995)
                                           s
                                       1          q2
                              µ̄p,q =    2
                                            p2 + 2 ,                           (7.2)
                                      2πls        gs

where gs is the perturbative string coupling.
    This result is valid for (p, q)-bound states in a flat ten-dimensional spacetime.
It is modified when considering a cosmological background (Firouzjahi et al 2006,
Thomas & Ward 2006). For example in the case of the collision of cosmic super-
strings in a warped throat, as would occur in models of warped brane inflation
(Kachru et al 2003a), the inflation takes place inside a warped throat and cos-
mic superstrings produced at the end of inflation are located at the bottom of the
throat. To be specific, consider (p, q)-strings in the KS throat which is a warped

Article submitted to Royal Society
16                         E. J. Copeland & T. W. B. Kibble


deformed conifold. Here one finds for the tension of a string at the tip of the throat
(Firouzjahi et al 2006)
                                           s
                                   e2A0        q2  M2       πp 
                           µ̄p,q =                + 2 sin2       ,                 (7.3)
                                   2πls2        2
                                               gs  π         M

where M is an integral quantum number (the Ramond-Ramond F(3) flux). In the
limit where M → ∞, and the warping vanishes A0 → 0, this formula reduces to
the tension of a (p, q) string in a flat background given by Eq. (7.2).
    Strings are not an inevitable consequence of brane inflation. There are many
models in which they do not appear, for example based on the condensation of
an open string tachyon, or inflation based on closed string moduli. However, given
the expectation that the particle phenomenology associated with superstrings is
expected to be rich, we may well expect there to be standard cosmic strings, with
tensions well below the string scale emerging out of the supersymmetric grand
unified theories (Jeanerrot et al 2003).
    There are other proposals to form cosmic superstrings that do not rely on brane-
inflation. The idea of a Hagedorn phase transition dates back to well before the
second string revolution and has been used by a number of authors to explain the
distribution of strings in the early universe. The density of states of strings increases
exponentially with their mass. At a particular scale (the Hagedorn scale, which is
close to the string scale), there is a transition and all the available energy goes into
creating long strings, as opposed to loops. We might then expect some of these to
survive until the present day (Polchinski 2004, Frey et al 2006). If inflation is not
required, then it is possible to start with a large universe in the Hagedorn phase
(Nayari et al 2006).
    Although it is clear that the formation of cosmic superstrings depends on the
precise way in which inflation is occurring, what is important here is the fact that
they can form at all and not be diluted away by the exponential expansion of the
universe. So, given that they can form with a low tension and survive a period of
inflation, can we make them stable enough to be cosmologically interesting? We
now turn our attention to that question.


                               8. The stability issue
In his pioneering paper, Witten pointed out two types of instability the fundamental
strings would have (Witten 1985). Of course, given that he also pointed out the
inconsistency of the string tension with that required by the observation of the
large-scale structure, it seemed just as well that they were unstable. The first type
of instability is the fragmentation in open string theories (which we now think
of in terms of the breakage of strings on space-filling 9-branes) and the second
is confinement by axion domain walls with the resulting wall tension causing the
string loops to collapse. There are more potential instabilities we also need to be
aware of, namely an effect similar to baryon decay and tachyon condensation. These
involve technical calculations and we will not go into great detail here; the interested
reader is recommended to read Myers & Wyman (2009), Polchinski (2004,2005), or
Copeland et al (2004).

Article submitted to Royal Society
                                     Cosmic Strings                                  17


    Type-I strings were the first to be considered for their stability and it was shown
that there is a constant rate per unit length for the string to break up forming
a pair of new endpoints (Dai & Polchinski 1989, Mitchell et al 1989), the effect
being that a macroscopic string would break up into microscopic strings which
correspond to the lightest particle excitations. The same process can occur for F-
strings (fundamental Type-II strings) which can also end on Dp-branes, leading
to breakage. For complete instability this must be a space-filling D9-brane. If on
the other hand we have p < 9, then the Dp-brane does not fill all the compact
dimensions, leading to a suppression in the probability of splitting as there can be
a transverse separation between the strings and the D-branes, allowing metastable
strings to exist in some models. Although this argument applies primarily to Type I
and II fundamental strings, using S and T duality arguments it can be extended also
to other strings breaking on different branes (Copeland et al 2004). In general, for
stability of macroscopic strings, there must be no space-filling branes, but this is a
potential problem — space-filling branes play an important role in model building;
the low energy phenomenology seems to rely on their presence (Blumenhagen et al
2005). This implies that macroscopic strings can have at best indirect interactions
with the Standard-Model particles, gravity being the only mutual force. Otherwise
they will break on space-filling branes.
    A second model of instability is that the strings become confined by axion do-
main walls. It is an instability first noted by Vilenkin & Everett (1982) in the
context of cosmic strings but applies equally well to the case of superstrings, par-
ticularly those formed by wrapping a p-brane on a compact (p − 1)-cycle. Axion
fields then play an essential part in their construction. Unless the tension of the
wall is exceedingly small this will cause the string to rapidly disappear.
    A third mode of instability involves an analogue of ‘baryon decay’. Some of
the string models have fluxes on their internal cycles, fluxes which lead to an in-
teraction between the low-energy gauge fields and axions associated with the four-
dimensional strings. These fluxes can produce a new mechanism for string breakage.
For example consider a type IIB compactification with a three-cycle K3 containing
a nonvanishing Ramond-Ramond three-form flux
                                     Z
                                         F(3) = M.                                 (8.1)
                                       K3

It is possible for a D3-brane to wrap on the same internal cycle. Being a localised
particle in four dimensions, it is loosely referred to as a baryon; M F-strings end
on the baryon. For the case M = 1, the fundamental strings can break by the
production of baryon-antibaryon pairs (Copeland et al 2004). However, for M ≥ 2,
this decay mechanism stops working, leading to stable strings.
    The final mode of decay is through the condensation of tachyons, responsible for
the decay of an unstable D-brane. As it decays, the D-brane breaks up into ordinary
quanta along its length, similarly to the case of the breaking on space-filling branes.
The unstable D-brane is considered as being constructed from a D–D-brane pair
(Sen 1999), and the tachyon mediating the decay of the brane is an open string
stretching between them. It is possible to suppress this decay by separating the
brane-antibrane pair in the internal space, although even if that is done so that
none of the open string modes are tachyonic, there remains the possibility of decay
through nonperturbative tunneling processes.

Article submitted to Royal Society
18                         E. J. Copeland & T. W. B. Kibble


    Overall, there are clear modes of decay for F and D strings of all types, and for
them to remain viable candidates for cosmology conditions have to be in place to
suppress the natural decay routes. However, there are now models in which these
conditions can be met, in particular the K   KLM MT model, subject to conditions on
the parameters, and some with large extra dimensions. This is a complicated issue,
which we cannot treat in detail here, but we can give a flavour of the physics
responsible. Take for example the case of warped compactifications with throats.
We have already established that one principal decay mode is through the breaking
of strings on branes, implying that in general they should not co-exist in the same
throat. Given that, and recalling that the strings and branes both feel a potential
due to a gravitational redshift (warp factor) in the compact directions, to break
the strings, they must tunnel from the inflationary throat to one of the other wells
where they can end on a brane. Depending on the model being considered, the rate
for this this can be very slow indeed implying the existence of effectively stable
strings (Copeland et al 2004). In particular for the strings produced in inflationary
models driven by D3–D3-brane collisions, such as the K  KLMMT model, there are three
possible outcomes (Copeland et al 2004): (a) no strings will exist if all decay routes
are in operation; (b) D1-branes only (or fundamental strings only) persist if only
some instabilities are present; (c) (p, q)-strings with an upper bound on p exist, if
the instabilities are under control.
    For the case of wrapped branes in a Type-II compactification, Jones et al
(2002,2003) and Sarangi & Tye (2002) found a rich family of stable strings, with
string tensions in the range
                                     10−12 ≤ Gµ ≤ 10−6 ,                          (8.2)
with the preferred value around 10−7 . In obtaining this bound the authors worked
on the assumption that the CMB anisotropies are due to quantum fluctuations of
the inflaton field as opposed to any other mechanism. This then allows the string
tension to be related to the observed quantities arising in brane inflation. The details
of the allowed strings are quite technical and the reader is referred to the original
papers for the full description. As a brief summary, the authors consider brane
inflationary scenarios where the string scale is close to the GUT scale implying
that the post-inflation brane-world models are supersymmetric at the GUT scale.
In the 10-dimensional superstring theory, the cosmic strings living in 4-dimensional
spacetime are Dp-branes with p − 1 dimensions wrapped on a compact cycle and
one spatial dimension along one of the 3 large spatial dimensions. Considering a
typical Type-IIB orientifold model compactified on the T 6 /Z2 orientifold, where
the Z2 reflects k coordinates, the authors obtain the number of possible stable
(after inflation) configurations of branes of different dimensionality in 10 dimen-
sions, compactified on the six manifold. There are many of them including long
lived D1-branes, F-strings and hence (p, q)-strings. Although the Standard-Model
branes present may allow some of these strings to break, those that are wrapped on
different cycles from the Standard-Model branes, for example, will remain stable.

                        9. Intercommuting properties
In this section we begin to address perhaps the most important question concerning
cosmic superstrings. How can we differentiate a network of them from the more

Article submitted to Royal Society
                                     Cosmic Strings                                 19


traditional field-theory-based cosmic strings? We have seen in earlier sections that
it is possible to form cosmic superstrings from string theory and that they can be
long-lived (cosmologically), survive a period of inflation and have a macroscopic
length. They bring with them two particular features that may help us distinguish
the two types. They are a reduced probability of intercommuting (Jackson et al
2005) and the formation of junctions in the (p, q)-string networks (Sen 1998). We
will concentrate on these two features in this section.



                              (a) Reconnection probabilities

    We have already seen that field-theory simulations of cosmic strings indicate
that the probability of intercommuting is essentially unity, P = 1, with only ultra-
relativistic strings being able to pass through each other without reconnecting, a
result true of both global (Shellard 1987) and local (Matzner 1989) cosmic strings.
The case for superstrings is different however, as pointed out in great detail by
Jackson et al (2005). Earlier, Polchinski (1988) had shown that in the context of
string perturbation theory, for fundamental strings, the reconnection probability
depends primarily on the string coupling constant gs and is of order gs2 , allowing it
of course to be much less than one.
    Jackson et al (2005) extended this approach, analysing the collisions between
all possible pairs of fundamental and Dirichlet strings, as well as their (p, q) bound
states. The strength of the interaction between the colliding strings depends on the
details of the compactification, the relative velocity of the strings, their intersec-
tion angle and crucially on gs . Averaging over angles and velocities they obtained
estimates for the intercommuting probability for three scenarios A,B and C. Case
A involves the K  KLM MT model in which quantum fluctuations over the S 3 of the
Klebanov-Strassler throat solution have been averaged over. Case B is where the
fluctuations in the throat do not fill out the S 3 and case C is the situation for
models of large extra dimensions. The reconnection probability P depends strongly
on the type of strings and on the details of the compactification, with full details
given by Jackson et al (2005). The analysis shows that the D-D string reconnection
probability is in the range 0.1 . P . 1, whereas for F-strings 10−3 . P . 1. As
far as (p, q) strings are concerned, the probability can be larger or smaller than
for single strings. For the case where there are stable cosmic strings for more than
one (p, q) value, the reconnection probabilities of different types of strings are very
important in determining what happens to the network. The fact that the prob-
ability of reconnection P is generally below unity means that networks of F- or
D-strings can in principle be distinguished from gauge-theory strings. If P ∼ 10−3 ,
that would have a large effect on the behavior of string networks.
    An important consequence of a reduction in intercommutation rates is that the
density of long strings has to increase because loop formation becomes less efficient
as a mechanism for energy loss. Quite how the density changes with probability is a
matter of some debate. Semi-analytical arguments based on scaling suggest that the
density of long strings should scale as ρstr ∝ P −1 (Sakellariadou 2005). However,
numerical studies of string networks where the intercommutation probability is
reduced have shown that the strings tend to cross microscopically many times
during an intercommutation event, the result being that for P ≥ 0.1 there is very

Article submitted to Royal Society
20                          E. J. Copeland & T. W. B. Kibble


             10
                                                                           N=2
                                                                           N=3
            9.0                                                            N=4
                                                                           N=10
            8.0                                                            N=30
                                                                           N=50
          7.0                                                              N=100
         ξN
          6.0

            5.0

            4.0

            3.0

            2.0
                  0          20            40           60           80          100
                                                time
Figure 5. The evolution of the typical string length-scale ξN as a function of N. Scaling
                   corresponds to ξN ∝ t (Copeland & Saffin 2005).



little enhancement of ρstr whereas for P ≤ 0.1, one finds ρstr ∝ P −γ with γ ∼ 0.6
(Avgoustidis & Shellard 2006).

                                      (b) Bound states
     When strings of two different types cross they cannot intercommute in the same
way as usual. Rather they can produce a pair of trilinear vertices connected by
a segment of string (Figure 3). For example, the crossing of a (p, q) string and a
(p′ , q ′ ) string can produce a (p + p′ , q + q ′ ) string or a (p − p′ , q − q ′ ) string. Only
for (p′ , q ′ ) = ±(p, q) is the usual intercommutation possible. We saw earlier that
the D3/D3-brane inflation model can lead to the formation of a network of (p, q)-
strings. For the case of the ten-dimensional Type-IIB theory the tension is given
by Eqn. (7.2) although the specific form depends on the underlying nature of the
string compactification (see for example Eqn. (7.3)). In general it depends on the
square root of a function of p and q.
     Over the past few years an alternative approach has emerged to determine the
properties of a network of (p, q) strings, which should be a good approximation at
least for the lowest lying tension states. That has been the development of field-
theory analogues, either combinations of interacting abelian models (Saffin 2005,
Rajantie et al 2007) or through non-abelian models (Spergel & Pen 1997, McGraw
1998, Copeland & Saffin 2005). In both cases the networks that form admit trilinear
vertices, hence junctions where the usual intercommutation properties of the strings
no longer apply.
     It has been suggested that if P is large (i.e. P ∼ 1), the strings can in principle
freeze into a three-dimensional network different from the usual scaling solution. It

Article submitted to Royal Society
                                     Cosmic Strings                                  21


is likely however that complicated networks will form initially but that a scaling
regime is eventually reached, in which the ratios of lengths of different kinds of
strings are constant. Evidence for this has been provided both analytically (Tye et
al 2005, Avgoustidis & Shellard 2006) and by numerically modelling the network
with field-theory networks (Copeland & Saffin 2005, Hindmarsh & Saffin 2006).
     The conclusion is that a network of bound strings will reach a scaling solution
with the lowest lying states, the F-, D- and (1,1)-strings, having higher number
densities compared to the higher-tension strings. This is because the unbinding of
higher-tension strings is favoured kinematically compared with the binding pro-
cesses. As an example of the scaling solutions which are achieved from complicated
initial networks of strings see Figure 5 which is taken from the field-theory simula-
tions of Copeland & Saffin (2005). Considering a field theory containing N different
species of string, they study the effect of non-intercommuting events due to two dif-
ferent species crossing each other, and look for evidence of scaling indicated by the
characteristic length scale evolving so that it eventually scales linearly with the
proper time t, i.e. ξN ∝ t.
     A key aspect of string theory is the existence of string dualities which relate
different string models, hence can relate different types of string that are formed.
The (p, q)-strings form a mulitiplet under a discrete SL(2,Z) symmetry of the ten-
dimensional Type-IIB theory (Schwarz 1995). This means that an F-string (a (1,0)-
string) can be mapped to a general (p, q)-string by an appropriate application of an
SL(2,Z) transformation, leading to the formation of many types of string, not just
the basic F-string. Of course this does not mean they would all form; that would
depend on the detailed dynamics of the particular model being considered, but in
principle they could form leading to a rich structure of low-tension bound cosmic
superstrings.
     The kinematics of strings that can form junctions is a fascinating area of research
which has only recently started receiving attention (Copeland et al 2006,2007, Davis
et al 2008). A number of important features have emerged through studies of the
collisions of Nambu-Goto strings with junctions at which three strings meet. One is
that the exchange to form junctions cannot occur if the strings meet with very large
relative velocity. For the case of non-abelian strings, rather than passing through
one another they become stuck in an X configuration (Copeland et al 2007), in
each case the constraint depending on the angle at which the strings meet, on their
relative velocity, and on the ratios of the string tensions. Calculations of the average
speed at which a junction moves along each of the three strings from which it is
formed yield results consistent with our earlier observation that junction dynamics
may be such as to preferentially remove the heavy strings from the network leaving
a network of predominantly light strings.
     Copeland et al (2008) extended this discussion to include the formation of three-
string junctions between (p, q)-cosmic superstrings, which required modifications of
the Nambu-Goto equations to take account of the additional requirements of flux
conservation. Investigating the collisions between such strings they showed that
kinematic constraints analogous to those found previously for collisions of Nambu-
Goto strings apply here too. Extending their analysis to the K      KLM MT -motivated
model of the formation of junctions for strings in a warped space, specifically with
a KS throat, they showed that similar constraints still apply with changes to the
parameters taking account of the warping and the background flux.


Article submitted to Royal Society
22                         E. J. Copeland & T. W. B. Kibble


    A number of these constraints that have emerged from analysing the modified
Nambu-Goto equations have been checked through numerical simulations of field-
theory strings which can also lead to junction formation (Sakellariadou & Stoica
2008, Salmi et al 2008, Bevis & Saffin 2008, Bevis et al 2009). In most cases good
agreement has been obtained with the analytical predictions, although the results
of Urrestilla & Vilenkin (2008) show some surprising features, and of course some
important differences emerge due to the fact that field-theory strings have interac-
tions between them that are not found in the Nambu-Goto case, hence some of the
detailed numbers differ. For example, Salmi et al (2008) found, when investigating
the collision of strings numerically in the framework of themabelian Higgs model in
the Type-I regime, that strings can effectively pass through each other when they
meet at speeds slightly above the analytically obtained critical velocity permitting
bound-state formation. This is due to reconnection effects that are beyond the scope
of the Nambu-Goto approximation.




                               (c) Problems of stable relics

    Analytical modelling (Tye et al 2005, Avgoustidis & Shellard 2008) suggests
that if too many species form then the overall number density of strings would
increase dramatically above the usual scenarios. The knock-on effect would be that
the average velocity of strings in the network would go to zero, leading to the
formation of a cosmologically forbidden frustrated network of strings — forbidden
because such a network would quickly come to dominate the energy density of the
universe and act as dark energy with effective equation of state w ≡ p/ρ = − 31
which is ruled out by recent observations (Spergel et al 2007).
    As mentioned earlier, the appearance of monopoles or domain walls would be
observationally unacceptable. But even without these, another possible problem
was pointed out by Avgoustidis & Shellard (2005). It involves the possibility that,
in winding around a compact extra dimension in a way that forbids the loop to
vanish, the strings themselves can form new stable remnants they termed cycloops.
If they do form in a network the strings responsible for them would have to have
incredibly small tensions, Gµ . 10−18 , so they would be impossible to detect with
current or planned experiments.
    There also remains the possibility of stable loops of superconducting string form-
ing vortons (Davis & Shellard 1989) which are stabilised by their angular momen-
tum and cannot be radiated away classically. If formed from a first-order transition
these would be disastrous cosmologically for all Gµ > 10−20 (Martins & Shellard
1998). However these conclusions rely on the superconducting currents being the
same as those of the gauge groups of the Standard Model, which is not very likely
as we have already established that for cosmic superstrings to be stable against
breakage on space-filling branes seems to require that the cosmic superstrings have
only indirect, e.g. gravitational, interactions with the Standard-Model particles. Of
course it is possible to turn these problems on their heads and tune the parameters
so that the remnant loops actually play the role of dark matter.

Article submitted to Royal Society
                                     Cosmic Strings                                   23


  10. Observational signatures of cosmic strings and cosmic
                          superstrings
The most exciting aspect of cosmic superstrings must be the fact that they could
leave cosmological signatures for us — they may be out there waiting to be detected
in the large-scale features of our universe. We now turn our attention to this, but
first a word of warning. Most of the predictions to date are based on approaches
developed for the original cosmic strings, which did not possess the richness of the
cosmic superstrings. Therefore they should be treated with a degree of caution; the
full calculations remain to be performed. However, there are features which may
allow us to distinguish between the two and we will highlight these in this section
where appropriate.


                           (a) Gravitational effects of strings

    Both cosmic strings and cosmic superstrings experience gravitational interac-
tions, which offer the best possibility for observationally confirming their existence.
Depending on the precise nature of the strings, other types may interact in different
ways, and offer distinct possibilities for detection. We will briefly comment on this
later in this section. One of the strings’ gravitational effects would be to generate
density perturbations in the universe, and at one time it was thought that this
might provide an explanation for the origin of the primordial perturbations from
which galaxies and stars have developed. However observations of the cosmic mi-
crowave background (CMB) by COBE and WMAP have shown conclusively that
this effect can at most account for a small fraction of the total power, up to 10%
(Pogosian et al 2009, Bevis et al 2008). The theory of inflation provides a very
good fit to the observed power spectrum, in particular the acoustic peaks, whereas
cosmic strings alone would yield a featureless spectrum with a single broad peak.
This imposes an upper limit on the string tension: Gµ . 2.1 × 10−7 (Fraisse 2007).
    The gravitational field around a cosmic string (or cosmic superstring) is quite
unusual. Around a straight, local cosmic string, spacetime is actually locally flat;
the gravitational acceleration towards the string is zero (Vilenkin 1981). This is
because the tension and energy per unit length are equal, but tension acts as a
negative source of the gravitational field. However, spacetime is not globally flat,
but essentially cone-shaped, as though a wedge with apex along the string had been
removed and the two faces stuck together.
    The deficit angle δ is related to the dimensionless constant Gµ introduced in
Section 4; in fact δ = 8πGµ. Explicitly, if the string is along the z axis, the spacetime
metric around it is

                       ds2 = dt2 − dz 2 − dρ2 − (1 − 8Gµ)ρ2 dϕ2 ,                 (10.1)

which is flat in terms of the modified azimuthal coordinate ϕ′ = (1−4Gµ)ϕ, ranging
from 0 to 2π − 8πGµ. This constant Gµ is the key parameter determining whether
or not there are observable effects of strings. From (2.5) we see that for strings
created at an energy scale Tc , Gµ is of order (Tc /MPl )2 , where MPl is the Planck
mass (= G−1/2 ≈ 1019 GeV). In particular for strings created at a GUT transition,

Article submitted to Royal Society
24                         E. J. Copeland & T. W. B. Kibble




                          *            δ
                                            string

                           *
                     Figure 6. Lensing of a distant source by a string.


we expect Gµ to be of order 10−6 or 10−7 . The deficit angle is given explicitly by
                                          
                                       Gµ
                            δ = 5.2          arcsec.                          (10.2)
                                      10−6
   Note that spacetime is only locally flat around straight strings. If they are wiggly,
with many kinks, then the effective energy per unit length U will be larger than µ
and the effective tension T will be smaller; typically T U = µ2 (Carter 1990, Vilenkin
1990). In that case, in addition to the deficit angle, there is a net gravitational
acceleration towards the string.

                                       (b) Lensing
    The most obvious effect of this geometry is gravitational lensing. Light from
a distant source may reach us round either side of a cosmic string (see Fig. 6),
thus creating a double image with a separation angle of order δ. If the string is
straight, then since each ray passes only through locally flat spacetime, the im-
ages are not magnified, in sharp contrast to gravitational lensing by other kinds
of objects, though this is not precisely true if the strings are wiggly. Thus a very
characteristic signature of cosmic-string lensing is the appearance of a pair of im-
ages of very similar magnitude, and without the distortions seen in most cases of
gravitational lensing. Moreover one would expect to see other such pairs in the
neighbourhood, ranged along the path of the string. There have in fact been two
reported observations that seemed at first sight to be possible examples of this phe-
nomenon (Cowie & Hu 1987, Sazhin et al 2003), though in both cases further study
has shown that they are probably merely pairs of surprisingly similar objects that
happen to lie close together (Hu 1990, Sazhin et al 2006). Given that the typical
distance ξ between strings is a significant fraction of the horizon distance, and that
imaging would only occur for objects lying beyond the string and within a very
narrow band of width at most of order an arc-second or so, to have found such a
pair might seem rather fortuitous. Morganson et al (2009) recently presented limits
based on a survey of possible lensed optical images.
    Gravitational lensing also offers a way of detecting cosmic superstrings, in par-
ticular networks of (p, q)-strings. As we have seen in Section 9 these strings can form
junctions at which three strings meet, opening up the possibility of new lensing sig-
natures of a three-way lensing junction (Shlaer & Wyman 2005, Brandenberger et
al 2008) as light passes by them. In principle knowing the angles in the pattern
would allow for the relative tensions of the strings to be determined, and this could

Article submitted to Royal Society
                                     Cosmic Strings                                  25


be tested against the predictions of a set of (p, q)-strings where the three tensions
are linked.
    There has also been discussion of the possibility of detecting very small, rapidly
oscillating loops by their microlensing effects (Dyda & Brandenberger 2007, Cher-
noff & Tye 2007), although others have concluded that this is unlikely to succeed
(Kuijken et al 2007). Future radio interferometers may be able to detect lensing by
loops, thereby offering an efficient way of observing or placing limits on them (Mack
et al 2007). A characteristic feature of the perturbations induced by cosmic strings
is that they include vector as well as scalar and tensor modes. One consequence of
this would be rotation of the images of distant galaxies, which could be detected in
weak lensing surveys (Thomas et al 2009).


                    (c) Effect on the cosmic microwave background
    Another very characteristic signature of cosmic strings would be their effect on
the CMB (Kaiser & Stebbins 1984). If a string is moving transversely across the
sky with velocity v, there will be a red-shift of radiation passing ahead of it, and a
blue-shift of radiation passing behind it. Thus one should see a line discontinuity
in the CMB temperature, of order δT /T ∼ Gµv. Since the strings are moving
fast, this temperature difference should in principle be detectable. Unfortunately
the temperature variation occurs only over a very narrow angular band (of order δ
wide) and existing detectors such as WMAP do not yet have the required resolution
(Jeong & Smoot 2007). However it is possible that it could be seen at the South
Pole Telescope, provided that Gµ > 5.8 × 10−8 (Stewart & Brandenberger 2009).
It is also conceivable that the Planck instrument might do so.
    The vector-mode perturbations induced by cosmic strings will in turn lead to
polarization of the CMB, and this may turn out to be one of the best ways of
detecting cosmic strings, in particular via the B-mode polarization (Pogosian &
Wyman 2008) which the Planck satellite will be capable of detecting.
    The case of small-scale anisotropies generated by strings with junctions has
been considered by Brandenberger et al (2008), who conclude that a distinctive
signature in this case is line discontinuities joined at a point for an observer looking
at the surface of last scattering, with the details of the image depending on the
orientations of the strings and the direction of motion of the junction with respect
to the line of sight.


                                (d ) Gravitational radiation
    One of the most promising ways of detecting the presence of cosmic strings and
cosmic superstrings is via the gravitational radiation they emit. If, as is widely
accepted, emission of gravitational radiation is the primary mechanism of energy
loss from strings, then they will have contributed a substantial amount to the
gravitational-wave background in the universe. An important role in the emission
of gravitational radiation is played by the appearance of cusps on the strings. These
are points where in the Nambu-Goto approximation the unit vectors p and q of
(3.11) satisfy p = q. At such points, the string momentarily reaches the speed of
light. Consequently, the gravitational radiation emitted in the neighbourhood of
this event is very strongly beamed in the direction of the string velocity. Damour &

Article submitted to Royal Society
26                         E. J. Copeland & T. W. B. Kibble


Vilenkin (2005) have shown that the cusps yield a very characteristic gravitational-
wave signature which, depending on the intercommuting probability P and num-
ber of cusps per loop oscillation, could be detected for string tensions as low as
Gµ ∼ 10−10 , placing them well within range of the predicted values for cosmic su-
perstrings arising out of brane inflation (see Eqn. 8.2). In particular as P decreases,
the density of strings in a string network increases leading to the production of
more gravitational waves and a higher strain signal. Existing detectors are not yet
sensitive enough to have a good chance of seeing this signal, though LIGO has been
used to exclude some regions of parameter space (Abbott et al 2009). Whether it
will be visible to LIGO2 or LISA will again depend strongly on the value of Gµ
and on various other parameters (Polchinski 2007).
    There are strong limits on the gravitational wave background stemming from
observations of millisecond pulsars, which serve as extremely accurate clocks. Any
gravitational radiation present will disturb the timing of the pulses. So the observed
regularity of the pulses over more than two decades places a firm upper limit on
the energy density in gravitational waves (Hobbs et al 2009). This then translates
into an upper limit on the value of the cosmic string tension:

                                     Gµ < 1.5 × 10−8 c−3/2 ,                    (10.3)

where c is the mean number of cusps on each loop. This is probably the most
stringent current limit on Gµ. The actual value of the limit depends strongly on
two other parameters: the ratio α = l/t of the typical loop size to the time and
the intercommuting probability P described above (which we recall is close to 1 for
most ordinary cosmic strings, but can be substantially less for cosmic superstrings).
Recently a number of authors have turned their attention to the specific cases of
gravitational radiation from strings with junctions which are more applicable to
the cosmic superstring case (Siemens et al 2006, 2007, Brandenberger et al 2009a,
Binetruy et al 2009, Jackson & Siemens 2009), but much needs to be done to really
establish their impact on the gravitational wave signature.
    Gravitational radiation emitted by cosmic strings will also induce B-mode po-
larization in the CMB, but this will be swamped by the much larger effect of the
vector modes mentioned above.


                                     (e) Other observations
   There are several other possible ways in which cosmic strings might reveal
their presence. High-energy particles may be emitted by strings from the regions
around their cusps, conceivably providing an explanation for the observed very-
high-energy cosmic rays (Brandenberger et al 2009). Cusps might also perhaps
induce shock waves that could generate gamma-ray bursts (Berezinsky 2001). Al-
though not generic, it is possible that cosmic superstrings could be superconducting
(Witten 1985a), carrying massless degrees of freedom charged under an unbroken
gauge symmetry (Polchinski 2004). Certain kinds of strings could yield a mecha-
nism for generating primeval galactic magnetic fields (Davis & Dimopoulos 2005,
Gwyn et al 2008). Yet another effect might be the generation of early reionization.
Olum & Vilenkin (2006) estimate that to avoid conflict with observation this would
require Gµ < 3 × 10−8 .

Article submitted to Royal Society
                                     Cosmic Strings                                  27


             (f ) Observational features particular to cosmic superstrings

    Imagine the exciting situation where some signature of cosmic strings is seen.
Could we determine whether what has been observed are cosmic superstrings as
opposed to say cosmic strings arising in GUT theories? There are two principal
ways we may be able to do so.
    The first is somewhat indirect and makes use of the differences in the respective
reconnection probability P discussed in Section 9(a) whilst the second is based on
the fact that cosmic superstrings can form junctions and bound states as discussed
in Section 9(b). This in turn leads to new features in the string network as com-
pared to the ‘vanilla’ type of string which is normally discussed. The fact that the
reconnection probabilities for F-F, D-D and F-D strings can be substantially less
than unity implies that the amount of string in the network must be increased
by some factor related to the probability. As discussed earlier, a consequence of
increasing the density of strings is that there can be a dramatic increase in the
gravitational-wave signal produced by the network (Damour & Vilenkin 2005), in
the most favourable case making it possible that LIGO could well soon start see-
ing many cusps. Of course, increasing the density of string in the universe has the
knock on effect of making the existing bounds on the string tension even stronger,
because there would be more string to see, hence the allowed string tension must
go down. If the probability is dramatically different from unity, the standard field-
theory value, then given enough observations of the gravitational-wave signal, it
should be possible to determine both the string tension µ and P , hence to rule
out standard field-theory cosmic strings as the source. However, if the probability
differs only slightly from unity, then it will be much more difficult to distinguish the
two sources, although it is the case that cosmic strings arising out of GUT models
tend to have P = 1 as a robust result, implying that a result differing from unity
would be significant.
    The formation of networks of bound state (p, q)-strings discussed in Section 9(b)
could be a smoking gun for cosmic superstrings. Both analytic and numerical mod-
eling of comparable networks suggest that they will reach a scaling solution with
an enhanced string density, and, given that, it could well be possible to eventually
have enough information to distinguish F-D string networks from other types. In
the context of brane inflation, these (p, q) networks can be considered as a fairly
generic outcome because the inflation usually takes place in a warped throat region,
and it is in such a situation that we find both F and D-strings forming, hence (p, q)
strings with a tension given by Eqn. 7.3 for example. Unfortunately networks with
junctions are not unique to bound states of F and D strings. Mulitple types of string
can arise in field theories leading to complicated networks with junctions, although
the particular spectrum of Eqn. 7.3 could well be unique. Even if that is the case,
duality relations exist between the various string solutions meaning there will be
gauge theory strings that are very hard to differentiate from these F- and D- strings.
Looking at the network as a whole, if it was possible to measure the tensions of
many strings in the network, it would be possible see whether the distribution of
tensions fitted
            p the form predicted by a (p, q) network, in particular was it of the
form µ ∼ f (p2 , q 2 )? Realistically, such precision is unlikely, and given that we
expect only the lowest values of p and q to be excited, it could well be that a tuned
field theory will mimic what is found. However, there is little doubt that either of

Article submitted to Royal Society
28                         E. J. Copeland & T. W. B. Kibble


these two results (three-way lensing and multiple tensions) would generate a lot of
excitement in the string community and prompt more detailed investigation.
    There are other possibilities that could provide indirect evidence of cosmic su-
perstrings (for details see Myers & Wyman 2009). They include the formation of
‘baryons’ or beads on a string network, and strings ending on monopoles which can
be considered as beads with only a single string attached, and which can produce
observable gravity wave bursts (Leblond et al 2009). There has also been interest
recently in the possibility that the equivalent of semilocal strings (Vachaspati &
Achúcarro 1991) could be found in D3/D7 models of brane inflation (Urrestilla et
al 2004).



                                     11. Conclusions
Many early-universe scenarios predict the appearance of cosmic strings or super-
strings. The most promising perhaps is brane-world inflation. Models in which in-
flation is driven by a collision between D3- and D3-branes generically predict the
formation of strings of various types, F- and D-strings and composite (p.q)-strings.
The details of which strings are stable or metastable are complicated but the con-
ditions are not overly restrictive. Even in models where inflation does not involve
branes, cosmic superstrings may be formed by other mechanisms. Moreover, ordi-
nary cosmic strings may appear later in the evolutionary process.
    There are many possible ways by which cosmic strings or superstrings may be
detected. Their direct lensing effect may be observable if Gµ is reasonably close to
the present observational upper bound. Loops offer the possibility of being seen if
their tension is low enough, because they last longer, hence their number density will
increase. This is particularly the case if they were to cluster near our galaxy (Cher-
noff & Tye 2007). In fact these authors claim that the planned astronomical survey
mission GAIA could observe strings with tensions as low as Gµ ≥ 10−10 because the
loops generate microlensing events that will be within GAIA’s reach. Small-scale
observations of the CMB using the Atacama Cosmology Telescope (ACT) and the
South Pole Telescope (SPT) may reveal the characteristic discontinuities created by
cosmic strings for tensions satisfying Gµ ≥ 10−7 (Fraisse et al 2008). The fact that
strings can directly source vector mode perturbations at last scattering implies that
even light strings can generate strong B-mode polarisation in the CMB, providing
a signal which is distinguishable from the type of spectrum expected from infla-
tion (Pogosian & Wyman 2008, Bevis et al 2008). Current experiments searching
for characteristic patterns in the B-mode polarisation, include BICEP, PolarBear,
and Spider and these have just been joined by Planck in the search. Gravitational
radiation emitted from cusps, as well as from kinks or junctions, may be detectable
by future experiments, such as LISA and remain probably the most sensitive test
for cosmic strings and cosmic superstrings, as they could detect loops with tensions
as low as Gµ ≥ 10−13 (Damour & Vilenkin 2005). Meanwhile, the introduction
of Pulsar Timing Arrays will provide ever more constraining limits on the allowed
string tensions as will direct gravity wave searches like LIGO2 or LISA.
    Success in any of these observations would trigger huge interest, and allow us to
plan further observations to probe the detailed nature of the strings, in particular
to distinguish ordinary cosmic strings from superstrings. A positive result would

Article submitted to Royal Society
                                     Cosmic Strings                                    29


yield a lot of information about the nature of the underlying fundamental theory,
information that would be very hard to gather in any other way.


                                     References
Abbott, B et al 2009 First LIGO search for gravitational wave bursts from cosmic (su-
  per)strings. Phys. Rev. D 80, 062002 [arXiv:0904.4718 [astro-ph.CO]].
Achúcarro, A. & de Putter, R. 2006 Effective non-intercommutation of local cosmic strings
  at high collision speeds. Phys. Rev. D 74, 121701 [arXiv:hep-th/0605084].
Alexander, S.H.S. 2002 Inflation from D–anti-D brane annihilation. Phys. Rev. D 65,
  023507 [arXiv:hep-th/0105032].
Allen, B. & Shellard, E.P.S. 1990 Cosmic string evolution: a numerical simulation. Phys.
  Rev. Lett. 64, 119–122.
Amaldi, W., de Boer, W., Frampton, P.H., Furstenau, H. & Liu, J.T. 1992 Consistency
  checks of grand unified theories. Phys. Lett. B 281, 374.
Antoniadis, I., Arkani-Hamed, N., Dimopoulos, S. & Dvali, G. 1998 New dimensions
  at a millimeter to a Fermi and superstrings at a TeV. Phys. Lett. B 436, 257
  [arXiv:hep-ph/9804398].
Arkani-Hamed, N., Dimopoulos, S. & Dvali, G. 1998 The hierarchy problem and new
  dimensions at a millimeter. Phys. Lett. B 429, 263 [arXiv:hep-ph/9803315].
Arkani-Hamed, N., Dimopoulos, S. & Dvali, G. 1999 Phenomenology, astrophysics and
  cosmology of theories with submillimeter dimensions and TeV scale quantum gravity.
  Phys. Rev. D 59, 086004 [arXiv:hep-ph/9807344].
Austin, D., Copeland, E.J. & Kibble, T.W.B. 1995 Characteristics of cosmic string scaling
  configurations. Phys. Rev. D 51, 2499 [arXiv:hep-ph/9406379].
Avgoustidis, A. & Shellard, E.P.S. 2005 Cycloops: Dark matter or a monopole problem
  for brane inflation? JHEP 0508, 092 [arXiv:hep-ph/0504049].
Avgoustidis, A. & Shellard, E.P.S. 2006 Effect of reconnection probability on cosmic (su-
  per)string network density. Phys. Rev. D 73, 041301 [arXiv:astro-ph/0512582].
Avgoustidis, A. & Shellard, E.P.S. 2008 Velocity-dependent models for non-abelian/en-
  tangled string networks. Phys. Rev. D 78, 103510 [arXiv:0705.3395 [astro-ph]].
Becker, K., Becker, M. & Strominger, A. 1995 Five-branes, membranes and nonperturba-
  tive string theory. Nucl. Phys. B 456, 130-152 [arXiv:hep-th/9507158].
Becker, K., Becker, M. & Schwarz, J. 2007 String theory and M-theory: A modern intro-
  duction, Cambridge University Press.
Bennett, D.P. & Bouchet, F.R. 1990 High resolution simulations of cosmic string evolution.
  1. Network evolution. Phys. Rev. D 41, 2408–33.
Berezinsky, V., Hnatyk, B. & Vilenkin, A. 2001 Gamma ray bursts from superconducting
  cosmic strings. Phys. Rev. D 64, 043004 [arXiv:astro-ph/0102366].
Bettencourt, L.M.A. & Kibble, T.W.B. 1994 Non-intercommuting configurations
  in the collisions of type I U(1) cosmic strings. Phys. Lett. B332, 297–304
  [arXiv:hep-ph/9405221].
Bevis, N., Hindmarsh, M., Kunz, M. & Urrestilla, J. 2008 Fitting CMB data with cosmic
  strings and inflation. Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 021301 [arXiv:astro-ph/0702223].
Bevis, N. & Saffin, P.M. 2008 Cosmic string Y-junctions: A comparison between field
  theoretic and Nambu-Goto dynamics. Phys. Rev. D 78, 023503 [arXiv:0804.0200 [hep-
  th]].
Bevis, N., Copeland, E.J., Martin, P.Y., Niz, G., Pourtsidou, A., Saffin, P.M. & Steer,
  D.A. 2009 On the stability of cosmic string Y-junctions. arXiv:0904.2127 [hep-th].


Article submitted to Royal Society
30                         E. J. Copeland & T. W. B. Kibble


Binetruy, P., Bohe, A., Hertog, T. & Steer, D.A. 2009 Gravitational wave bursts from
  cosmic superstrings with Y-junctions. arXiv:0907.4522 [hep-th].
Blumenhagen, R., Cvetic, M., Langacker, P. & Shiu, G. 2005 Toward realistic intersecting
  D-brane models. Ann. Rev. Nucl. Part. Sci. 55, 71 [arXiv:hep-th/0502005].
Brandenberger, R., Firouzjahi, H. & Karouby, J. 2008 Lensing and CMB Anisotropies by
  Cosmic Strings at a Junction. Phys. Rev. D77, 083502 [arXiv:0710.1636 [hep-th]].
Brandenberger, R., Cai, Y.F., Xue, W. & Zhang, X.m. 2009 Cosmic ray positrons from
  cosmic strings. arXiv:0901.3474 [hep-ph].
Brandenberger, R., Firouzjahi, H., Karouby, J. & Khosravi, S. 2009a Gravitational Radi-
  ation by Cosmic Strings in a Junction. JCAP 0901, 008 arXiv:0810.4521 [hep-th].
Burgess, C., Majumdar, M., Nolte, D., Quevedo, F., Rajesh, G. & Zhang, R.J. 2001 The
  inflationary brane-antibrane universe. JHEP 0107, 047 [arXiv:hep-th/0105204].
Carter, B. 1990 Integrable equation of state for noisy cosmic string. Phys. Rev. D 41,
  3869.
Chernoff, D.F. & Tye, S.-H.H. 2007 Cosmic string detection via microlensing of stars.
  arXiv:0709.1139 [astro-ph].
Copeland, E.J., Myers, R.C. & Polchinski, J. 2004 Cosmic F and D strings. JHEP 0406,
  013 [arXiv:hep-th/0312067].
Copeland, E.J. & Saffin, P. 2005 On the evolution of cosmic-superstring networks. JHEP
  0511, 023, [arXiv:hep-th/0505110].
Copeland, E.J., Kibble, T.W.B. & Steer, D.A. 2006 Collisions of strings with Y junctions.
  Phys. Rev. Lett 97, 021602 [arXiv:hep-th/0601153].
Copeland, E.J., Kibble, T.W.B. & Steer, D.A. 2007 Constraints on string networks with
  junctions. Phys. Rev. D 75, 065024 [arXiv:hep-th/0611243].
Copeland, E.J., Firouzjahi, H., Kibble, T.W.B. & Steer, D.A. 2008 On the collision of
  cosmic superstrings. Phys. Rev. D 77, 063521 [arXiv:0712.0808 [hep-th]].
Copeland, E.J. & Kibble, T.W.B. 2009 Kinks and small-scale structure on cosmic strings,
  [arXiv:0909.1960 [astro-ph]].
Cowie, L.L. & Hu, E.M. 1987 The formation of families of twin galaxies by string loops.
  Astrophys. J. 318, L33.
Dai, J. & Polchinski, J. 1989 The Decay Of Macroscopic Fundamental Strings. Phys. Lett.
  B 220, 387.
Davis, A.-C. & Dimopoulos, K. 2005 Cosmic superstrings and primordial magnetogenesis.
  Phys. Rev. D 72, 043517 [arXiv:hep-ph/0505242].
Davis, A.-C. & Kibble, T.W.B. 2005 Fundamental cosmic strings. Contemporary Physics
  46, 313–322.
Davis, A.-C., Nelson, W., Rajamanoharan, S. & Sakellariadou, M. 2008 Cusps on cosmic
  superstrings with junctions. JCAP 0811, 022 [arXiv:0809.2263 [hep-th]].
Damour, T. & Vilenkin, A. 2005 Gravitational radiation from cosmic (super)strings:
  Bursts, stochastic background, and observational windows. Phys. Rev. D 71, 063510
  [arXiv:hep-th/0410222].
Davis, R. & Shellard, E.P.S. 1989 Cosmic vortons. Nucl. Phys. B 323, 209.
Dubath, F., Polchinski, J. & Rocha, J.V. 2008 Cosmic string loops, large and small. Phys.
  Rev. D 77, 123528 [arXiv:0711.0994 [astro-ph]].
Dvali, G., & Tye, S.H. 1999 Brane inflation. Phys. Lett. B 450, 72 [arXiv:hep-ph/9812483].
Dvali, G., Shafi, Q. & Solganik, S. 2001 D-brane inflation. ArXiv:hep-th/0105203.
Dvali, G. & Vilenkin, A. 2003 Solitonic D-branes and brane annihilation. Phys. Rev. D
  67, 046002 [arXiv:hep-th/0209217].
Dvali, G. & Vilenkin, A. 2004 Formation and evolution of cosmic D strings. JHEP 0403,
  010 [arXiv:hep-th/0312007].


Article submitted to Royal Society
                                     Cosmic Strings                                   31


Dyda, S. & Brandenberger, R.H. 2007 Cosmic strings and weak gravitational lensing.
  arXiv:0710.1903 [astro-ph].
Eto, M., Hashimoto, K, Marmorini, G, Nitta, M., Ohashi, K. & Vinci, W. 2006
  Universal reconnection of non-abelian cosmic strings. Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 091602
  [arXiv:hep-th/0609214].
Firouzjahi, H., Leblond, L. & Tye, S.H.H. 2006 The (p, q) string tension in a warped
  deformed conifold. JHEP 0605, 047 [arXiv:hep-th/0603161].
Fraisse, A.A. 2007 Limits on defects formation and hybrid inflationary models with three-
  year WMAP observations. JCAP 0703, 008 [arXiv:astro-ph/0603589].
Fraisse, A.A., Ringeval, C., Spergel, D.N. & Bouchet, F.R. 2008 Small-Angle CMB
  Temperature Anisotropies Induced by Cosmic Strings. Phys. Rev. D 78, 043535
  [arXiv:0708.1162 [astro-ph]].
Frey, A.R., Mazumdar, A. & Myers, R.C. 2006 Stringy effects during inflation and reheat-
  ing. Phys. Rev. D 73, 026003 [arXiv:hep-th/0508139].
Giddings, S. Kachru, S. & Polchinski, J. 2002 Hierarchies from fluxes in string compacti-
  fications. Phys. Rev. D 66, 106006 [arXiv:hep-th/0105097].
Gwyn, R., Alexander, S.H., Brandenberger, R.H. & Dasgupta, K. 2009 Magnetic fields
  from heterotic cosmic strings. Phys. Rev. D 79, 083502 [arXiv:0811.1993 [hep-th]].
Hanany, A. & Hamimoto, K. 2005 Reconnection of colliding cosmic strings. JHEP 0506,
  021 [arXiv:hep-th/0501031].
Harvey, J.A., & Strominger, A. 1995 The heterotic string is a soliton. Nucl. Phys. B 449,
  535 [Erratum-ibid. B 458, 456 (1996)] [arXiv:hep-th/9504047].
Hindmarsh, M.B. & Kibble, T.W.B. 1994 Cosmic strings. Rep. Prog. Phys. 58, 477–562
  [arXiv:hep-ph/9411342].
Hindmarsh, M.B. & Saffin, P.M. 2006 Scaling in a SU (2)/Z3 model of cosmic superstring
  networks. JHEP 0608, 066 [arXiv:hep-th/0605014].
Hindmarsh, M., Stuckey, S. & Bevis, N. 2009 Abelian Higgs cosmic strings: small scale
  structure and loops. Phys. Rev. D 79, 123504 [arXiv:0812.1929].
Hobbs, G.B. et al 2009 Gravitational wave detection using pulsars: status of the Parkes
  Pulsar Timing Array project. To be published in PASA [arXiv:0812.2721v1 [astro-ph]].
Hu, E.M. 1990 Investigation of a candidate string-lensing field. Astrophys. J. 360, L7.
Jackson, M.G, Jones, N.T. & Polchinski, J. 2005 Collisions of cosmic F and D-strings.
  JHEP 0510, 013 [arXiv:hep-th/0405229].
Jackson, M.G, & Siemens, X. 2009 Gravitational wave bursts from cosmic superstring
  reconnections. JHEP 0906, 089 [arXiv:0901.0867 [hep-th]].
Jeanerrot, R., Rocher, J. & Sakellariadou, M. 2003 How generic is cosmic string formation
  in SUSY GUTs? Phys. Rev. D 68, 103514 [arXiv:hep-th/0308134].
Jeong, E. & Smoot, G.F. 2007 The validity of the cosmic string pattern search with the
  cosmic microwave background. Astrophys. J. 661, L1 [arXiv:astro-ph/0612706].
Jones, N., Stoica, H. & Tye, S.H. 2002 Brane interaction as the origin of ination. JHEP
  0207, 051 [arXiv:hep-th/0203163].
Jones, N., Stoica, H. & Tye, S.H. 2003 The production, spectrum and evolution of cosmic
  strings in brane ination. Phys. Lett. B 563, 6 [arXiv:hep-th/0303269].
Kachru, S., Kallosh, R., Linde, & Trivedi, S.P. 2003 De Sitter vacua in string theory.
  Phys. Rev. D 68, 046005 [arXiv:hep-th/0301240].
Kachru, S., Kallosh, R., Linde, A.D., Maldecena, J.M., McAllister, L.P. & Trivedi, S.P.
  2003a Towards inflation in string theory. JHEP 0310 013 [arXiv:hep-th/0308055].
Kaiser, N. & Stebbins, A. 1984 Microwave anisotropy due to cosmic strings. Nature 310,
  391–3.


Article submitted to Royal Society
32                         E. J. Copeland & T. W. B. Kibble


Kibble, T.W.B. 1976 Topology of cosmic domains and string. J. Phys. A: Math. & Gen.
  9, 1387–98.
Kibble, T.W.B. 1982 Phase transitions in the early universe. Acta Phys. Polonica B13,
  723–36.
Kibble, T.W.B. 2000 Classification of topological defects and their relevance to cosmology
  and elsewhere. In Topological defects and the non-equilibrium dynamics of symmetry
  breaking phase transitions, ed. Y.M. Bunkov & H. Godfrin. NATO Science Series C:
  Mathematical and Physical Sciences 549 7–31.
Kibble, T.W.B. & Copeland, E.J. 1991 Evolution of small scale structure on cosmic strings.
  Physica Scripta T36, 153.
Klebanov, I.R. & Strassler, M.J. 2000 Supergravity and a confining gauge theory:
  duality cascades and chi SB-resolution of naked singularities. JHEP 0008 053
  [arXiv:hep-th/0007191].
Kofman, L., Linde, A.D. & Starobinsky, A.A. 1996 Non-thermal phase transitions after
  inflation. Phys. Rev. Lett. 76, 1011 [arXiv:hep-th/9510119].
Kuijken, K., Siemens, X. & Vachaspati, V. 2007 Microlensing by cosmic strings.
  arXiv:0707.2971 [astro-ph].
Leblond, L., Shlaer, B. & Siemens, X. 2009 Gravitational waves from broken cosmic strings:
  the bursts and the beads. Phys. Rev. D 79, 123519 [arXiv:0903.4686 [astro-ph.CO]].
Mack, K.J., Wesley, D.H. & King, L.J. 2007 Observing cosmic string loops with gravita-
  tional lensing surveys. Phys. Rev. D 76, 123515 [arXiv:astro-ph/0702648].
Majumdar, M. & Davis, A.-C. 2002 Cosmological creation of D-branes and anti-D-branes.
  JHEP 0203, 056 [arXiv:hep-th/0202148].
Martins, C.J.A.P. & Shellard, E.P.S. 1996 Quantitative string evolution. Phys. Rev. D 54,
  2535 [arXiv:hep-ph/9602271].
Martins, C.J.A.P. & Shellard, E.P.S. 1998 Vorton formation. Phys. Rev. D57, 715
  [arXiv:hep-ph/9804378].
Martins, C.J.A.P. & Shellard, E.P.S. 2006 Fractal properties and small-scale structure of
  cosmic string networks. Phys. Rev. D 73, 043515 [arXiv:astro-ph/0511792].
Matzner, R.A., 1989 Interaction of U (1) cosmic strings: numerical intercommutation. Com-
  put. Phys. 2, 51.
McGraw, P. 1998 Evolution of a non-abelian cosmic string network. Phys. Rev. D 57,
  3317 [arXiv:astro-ph/9706182].
Mitchell, D., Turok, N., Wilkinson, R. & Jetzer, P. 1989 The decay of highly excited open
  strings. Nucl. Phys. B 315, 1 [Erratum: ibid. 322, 628 (1989)].
Morganson, E., Marshall, P., Treu, T., Schrabback, T. & Blandford, R.D. 2009 Direct
  observation of cosmic strings via their strong gravitational lensing: II. Results from the
  HST/ACS image archive. arXiv:0908.0602 [astro-ph.CO].
Myers, R.C. & Wyman, M. 2009 Cosmic superstrings. In Superstring cosmology: modern
  string theory concepts from the Big Bang to cosmic structure, ed. J. Erdmenger, Wiley.
Nayeri, A., Brandenberger, R.H. & Vafa, C 2006. Producing a scale-invariant spectrum of
  perturbations in a Hagedorn phase of string cosmology. Phys. Rev. Lett. 97, 021302
  [arXiv:hep-th/0511140].
Nielsen, H.B. & Olesen, P. 1973 Vortex-line models for dual strings. Nuc. Phys. B61,
  45-61.
Olum, K.D. & Vilenkin, A. 2006 Reionization from cosmic string loops. Phys. Rev. D 74,
  063516 [arXiv:astro-ph/0605465].
Pogosian, L., Tye, S.-H.H., Wasserman, I. & Wyman, M. 2009 Cosmic strings as the source
  of small-scale microwave background anisotropy. JCAP, 0902, 013 [arXiv:0804.0810
  [astro-ph]].


Article submitted to Royal Society
                                     Cosmic Strings                                      33


Pogosian, L. & Wyman, M. 2008 B-modes from cosmic strings. Phys. Rev. D 77, 083509
  [arXiv:0711.0747 [astro-ph]].
Polchinski, J. 1988 Collision of macroscopic fundamental strings. Phys. Lett. B 209, 252.
Polchinski, J. 1995 Dirichlet-branes and Ramond-Ramond charges. Phys. Rev. Lett. 75,
  4724 [arXiv:hep-th/9510017].
Polchinski, J. 1998 String theory. Vol. 1: An introduction to the bosonic string; Vol. 2:
  Superstring theory and beyond, Cambridge University Press.
Polchinski, J. 2004 Introduction to cosmic F and D-strings. ArXiv:hep-th/0412244.
Polchinski, J. 2005 Cosmic superstrings revisited. Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 20, 3413-5
  [arXiv:hep-th/0410082].
Polchinski, J. 2007 Cosmic string loops and gravitational radiation. arXiv:0707.0888 [astro-
  ph].
Polchinski, J. & Rocha, J.V. 2006 Analytic study of small scale structure on cosmic strings.
  Phys. Rev. D 74, 083504 [arXiv:hep-ph/0606205].
Polchinski, J. & Rocha, J.V. 2007 Cosmic string structure at the gravitational radiation
  scale. Phys. Rev. D 75, 123503 [arXiv:0709.3284].
Rajantie, A., Sakellariadou, M. & Stoica, H. 2007 Numerical experiments with p F- and
  q D-strings: The formation of (p, q) bound states. JCAP 0711, 021 [arXiv:0706.3662
  [hep-th]].
Randall, L. & Sundrum, R. 1999 A large mass hierarchy from a small extra dimension.
  Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 3370-3373 [arXiv:hep-ph/9905221].
Randall, L. & Sundrum, R. 1999a An alternative to compactification. Phys. Rev. Lett. 83,
  4690-4693 [arXiv:hep-ph/9906064].
Ringeval, C., Sakellariadou, M. & Bouchet, F. 2007 Cosmological evolution of cosmic
  string loops. JCAP 0702, 023 [arXiv:astro-ph/0511646].
Saffin, P.M. 2005 A Practical model for cosmic (p, q) superstrings. JHEP 0509, 011
  [arXiv:hep-th/0506138].
Sakellariadou, M. 2005 A Note on the evolution of cosmic string/superstring networks.
  JCAP 0504, 003 [arXiv:hep-th/0410234].
Sakellariadou, M. & Stoica, H. 2008 Dynamics of F/D networks: The role of bound states.
  JCAP 0808, 038 [arXiv:0806.3219 [hep-th]].
Sakellariadou, M. 2009 Cosmic strings and cosmic superstrings. Nucl. Phys. Proc.
  Suppl.192-193, 68-90 [arXiv:0902.0569v2 [hep-th]].
Salmi, P., Achúcarro, A., Copeland, E.J., Kibble, T.W.B., de Putter, R. & Steer, D.A. 2008
  Kinematic constraints on formation of bound states of cosmic strings: field theoretical
  approach. Phys. Rev. D77, 041701[arXiv:0712.1204 [hep-th]].
Sarangi, S. & Tye, S.H. 2002 Cosmic string production towards the end of brane ination.
  Phys. Lett. B 536, 185 [arXiv:hep-th/0204074].
Sazhin, M.V. et al 2003 CSL-1: a chance projection effect or serendipitous discovery of a
  gravitational lens induced by a cosmic string? Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 343, 353
  [arXiv:astro-ph/0302547].
Sazhin, M.V., Capaccioli, M., Longo, G.,Paolillo, M. & Khovanskaya, O.S. 2006 The true
  nature of CSL-1. ArXiv:astro-ph/0601494.
Schwarz, J.H. 1995 An SL(2,Z) multiplet of type IIB superstrings. Phys. Lett. B 360, 13
  [Erratum: ibid. B 364, 252 (1995)] [arXiv:hep-th/9508143].
Sen, A. 1998 String network. JHEP 9803, 005 [arXiv:hep-th/9711130].
Sen, A. 1999 NonBPS states and branes in string theory, arXiv:hep-th/9904207.
Shellard, E.P.S. 1987 Cosmic string interactions. Nucl. Phys. B 283, 624.
Shlaer, B. & Wyman, M. 2005 Cosmic superstring gravitational lensing phenomena: pre-
  dictions for networks of (p, q) strings. Phys. Rev. D 72, 123504 [arXiv:hep-th/0509177].


Article submitted to Royal Society
34                         E. J. Copeland & T. W. B. Kibble


Siemens, X. & Olum, K.D. 2001 Gravitational radiation and the small-scale struc-
   ture of cosmic strings. Nucl. Phys. B 611, 125 [Erratum: ibid. 645, 367 (2002)]
   [arXiv:gr-qc/0104085].
Siemens, X., Creighton, J., Maor, I., Majumder, S.R., Cannon, K. & Read, J. 2006 Grav-
   itational wave bursts from cosmic (super)strings: quantitative analysis and constraints.
   Phys. Rev. D 73, 105001 [arXiv:gr-qc/0603115].
Siemens, X., Mandic, V. & Creighton, J. 2007 Gravitational wave stochastic
   background from cosmic (super)strings. Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 111101 (2007)
   [arXiv:astro-ph/0610920].
Spergel, D.N. & Pen, U.L. 1997 Cosmology in a string-dominated universe. Astrophys. J.
   491, L67 [arXiv:astro-ph/9611198].
Spergel, D.N. et al 2007 Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe (WMAP)
   three year results: implications for cosmology. Astrophys. J. Suppl.170, 377
   [arXiv:astro-ph/0603449].
Stewart, A. & Brandenberger, R. 2009 Edge detection, cosmic strings and the South Pole
   Telescope. JCAP 0902, 009 [arXiv:0809.0865 [astro-ph]].
Thomas, D.B., Contaldi, C.R. & Magueijo, J. 2009 Rotation of galaxies as a signature of
   cosmic strings in weak lensing surveys. Phys. Rev. Lett. 103, 181301 [arXiv:0909.2866
   [astro-ph.CO]].
Thomas, S. & Ward, J. 2006 Non-abelian (p, q) strings in the warped deformed conifold
   JHEP 0612, 057 [arXiv:hep-th/0605099].
Tye, S.H., Wasserman, I. & Wyman, M. 2005 Scaling of multi-tension cosmic su-
   perstring networks. Phys. Rev. D 71, 103508 [Erratum: ibid. 71, 129906 (2005)]
   [arXiv:astro-ph/0503506].
Urrestilla, J., Achúcarro, A. & Davis, A.C. 2004 D term inflation without cosmic strings.
   Phys. Rev. Lett.92, 251302 [arXiv:hep-th/0402032].
Urrestilla, J. & Vilenkin, A, 2008 Evolution of cosmic superstring networks: a numerical
   simulation. JHEP 0802, 037 [arXiv:0712.1146 [hep-th]].
Vachaspati, T. & Vilenkin, A. 1985 Gravitational radiation from cosmic strings. Phys.
   Rev. D 31, 3052.
Vachaspati, T. & Achúcarro, A. 1991 Semilocal cosmic strings. Phys. Rev. D 44, 3067.
Vanchurin, V. 2008 Cosmic string loops: large and small, but not tiny. Phys. Rev. D 77,
   063532 [arXiv:0712.2236 [gr-qc]].
Vanchurin, V., Olum, K.D. & Vilenkin, A. 2006 Scaling of cosmic string loops. Phys. Rev.
   D 74, 063527 [arXiv:gr-qc/0511159].
Vilenkin, A. 1981 Gravitational field of vacuum domain walls and strings. Phys. Rev. D
   23, 852.
Vilenkin, A. & Everett, A.E. 1982 Cosmic strings and domain walls in models with Gold-
   stone and pseudogoldstone bosons. Phys. Rev. Lett. 48, 1867.
Vilenkin, A. 1990 Effect of small-scale structure on the dynamics of cosmic strings. Phys.
   Rev. D 41, 3038.
Vilenkin, A. & Shellard, E.P.S. 1994 Cosmic strings and other topological defects, Cam-
   bridge University Press.
Vincent, G., Antunes, N.D. & Hindmarsh, M. 1998 Numerical simulations of string net-
   works in the Abelian-Higgs model. Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 2277 [arXiv:hep-ph/9708427].
Witten, E. 1985 Cosmic superstrings, Phys. Lett. B 153, 243.
Witten, E. 1985a Superconducting strings. Nucl. Phys. B 249 557.
Witten, E. 1996 Bound states of strings and p-branes Nucl. Phys. B 460, 335
   [arXiv:hep-th/9510135].
Yokoyama, J. 1989 Inflation can save cosmic strings. Phys. Rev. Lett. 63, 712.



Article submitted to Royal Society
