Double Field Theory:

arXiv:1305.1907v2 [hep-th] 12 Aug 2013

A Pedagogical Review
Gerardo Aldazabala,b , Diego Marquésc and Carmen Núñezc,d
a Centro Atómico Bariloche, b Instituto Balseiro (CNEA-UNC) and CONICET.

8400 S.C. de Bariloche, Argentina.
c Instituto de Astronomı́a y Fı́sica del Espacio (CONICET-UBA)

C.C. 67 - Suc. 28, 1428 Buenos Aires, Argentina.
d Departamento de Fı́sica, FCEN, Universidad de Buenos Aires

aldazaba@cab.cnea.gov.ar , diegomarques@iafe.uba.ar , carmen@iafe.uba.ar

Abstract

Double Field Theory (DFT) is a proposal to incorporate T-duality, a distinctive symmetry of string theory, as a symmetry of a field theory defined on a double configuration
space. The aim of this review is to provide a pedagogical presentation of DFT and its applications. We first introduce some basic ideas on T-duality and supergravity in order to
proceed to the construction of generalized diffeomorphisms and an invariant action on the
double space. Steps towards the construction of a geometry on the double space are discussed. We then address generalized Scherk-Schwarz compactifications of DFT and their
connection to gauged supergravity and flux compactifications. We also discuss U-duality
extensions, and present a brief parcours on world-sheet approaches to DFT. Finally, we
provide a summary of other developments and applications that are not discussed in detail
in the review.
August 13, 2013

Contents
1 Introduction

3

2 Some references and a guide to the review

8

3

Double Field Theory

11

3.1

T-duality basics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

11

3.2

Supergravity basics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

16

3.3

Double space and generalized fields . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

17

3.4

Generalized Lie derivative . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

21

3.5

Consistency constraints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

23

3.6

The action . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

25

3.7

Equations of motion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

29

4 Double Geometry

32

4.1

Riemannian geometry basics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

32

4.2

Generalized connections and torsion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

35

4.3

Generalized curvature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

39

4.4

Generalized Bianchi identities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

43

5 Dimensional reductions

44

5.1

Scherk-Schwarz compactifications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

44

5.2

Geometric fluxes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

49

5.3

Gauged supergravities and duality orbits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

53

5.4

Generalized Scherk-Schwarz compactifications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

58

5.5

From gauged DFT to gauged supergravity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

62

5.6

Duality orbits of non-geometric fluxes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

63

1

6 U-duality and extended geometry

70

6.1

Generalized diffeomorphisms and the section condition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

70

6.2

The E7(7) case and maximal gauged supergravity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

73

7 Worldsheet motivations and approaches to DFT

80

7.1

The string spacetime action . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

80

7.2

Double string sigma model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

82

7.3

DFT from the double sigma model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

87

8 Other developments and applications

91

8.1

Non-commutative/non-associative structures in closed string theory

. . . . . . .

91

8.2

Large gauge transformations in DFT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

93

8.3

New perspectives on α′ corrections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

94

8.4

Geometry for non-geometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

95

8.5

Beyond supergravity: DFT without strong constraint . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

96

8.6

(Exotic) brane orbits in DFT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

97

8.7

New possibilities for upliftings, moduli fixing and dS vacua . . . . . . . . . . . .

98

9 Acknowledgments

98

2

1

Introduction

Double Field Theory (DFT) [1, 2] is a proposal to incorporate T-duality, a distinctive
symmetry of string (or M-)theory, as a symmetry of a field theory. At first sight, such
attempt could appear to lead to a blind alley since the very presence of T-duality requires extended objects like strings which, unlike field theory particles, are able to wrap
non-contractible cycles. It is the very existence of winding modes (associated to these
wrappings) and momentum modes that underlies T-duality, which manifests itself by connecting the physics of strings defined on geometrically very different backgrounds. Then,
a T-duality symmetric field theory must take information about windings into account.
A way to incorporate such information is suggested by compactification of strings on
a torus. In string toroidal compactifications, there are compact momentum modes, dual
to compact coordinates y m , m = 1, . . . , n, as well as string winding modes. Therefore,
it appears that a new set of coordinates ỹm , dual to windings, should be considered for
the compactified sector in the field theory description. It is in this sense that DFT is a
“doubled” theory: it doubles the coordinates of the compact space. Formally, the noncompact directions xµ , µ = 1, . . . , d are also assigned duals x̃µ for completion, although
this is merely aesthetical since nothing really depends on them. The DFT proposal is
that, for a D-dimensional space with d non-compact space-time dimensions and n compact
dimensions, i.e. D = n+d, the fields depend on coordinates X M = (x̃µ , ỹm , xµ , y m), where
xµ are space-time coordinates, x̃µ are there simply for decoration, and YA = (ỹm , y m ) are
2n compact coordinates, with A = 1, . . . , 2n.
When the compactification scale is much bigger than the string size, it is hard for
strings to wrap cycles and winding modes are ineffective at low energies. In the DFT
framework, this corresponds to the usual situation where there is no dependence on dual
coordinates. Oppositely, in the T-dual description, if the compactification scale is small,
then the momentum (winding) modes are heavy (light), and DFT only depends on dual
coordinates. Either way, these (de)compactification limits typically amount on the DFT
side to constrain the theory to depend only on a subset of coordinates. In particular, when
all the coordinates are non-compact, one finds complete correspondence with supergravity
3

in D = 10 dimensions.
The T-duality group associated to string toroidal compactifications on T n is O(n, n).
The doubled internal coordinates YA mix (span a vector representation) under the action
of this group. However, it proves useful to formulate the theory in a double space with full
duality group O(D, D), where all D coordinates are doubled, mimicking a string theory
where all dimensions are compact.1
The next step in the construction of DFT is to choose the defining fields. In the
simplest formulation of DFT, the field content involves the D-dimensional metric gij , a
two-form field bij and a scalar dilaton field φ. From a string perspective, they correspond
to the universal gravitational massless bosonic sector, present in the bosonic, heterotic
and Type II string theories as well as in the closed sector of Type I strings, in which
case bij would be a Ramond-Ramond (R-R) field. However, since we are looking for an
O(D, D) invariant theory, the fundamental fields should be O(D, D) tensors with 2D
dimensional indices. In fact, in DFT the gij and bij fields are unified in a single object:
a generalized O(D, D) symmetric metric HM N , with M, N = 1, . . . , 2D, defined in the
double space. Then, based on symmetries, DFT unifies through geometrization, since it
incorporates the two-form into a generalized geometric picture. There is also a field d,
which is a T-scalar combining the dilaton φ and the determinant of the metric g. The
first part of this review will be dedicated to discuss the consistent construction of a DFT
action as a functional of these generalized fields on a doubled configuration space.
In the decompactification limit (taking for example D = 10 so as to make contact with
string theory), when the dual coordinates are projected out, the DFT action reproduces
the action of the universal massless bosonic sector of supergravity


Z
√ −2φ
1
ijk
2
S =
dx ge
,
R + 4 (∂φ) − Hijk H
12
where Hijk = 3∂[i bjk] is the field strength of the two-form. This limit action is invariant
under the usual diffeomorphisms of General Relativity and gauge transformations of the
two-form. Following with the unification route, we then expect to combine these trans1

Time is treated here at the same level of other space coordinates for simplicity, but it can be restored

by a standard Wick rotation.

4

formations into “generalized diffeomorphisms” under which the DFT action should be
invariant. They should then reduce to standard general coordinate and gauge transformations in the decompactification limit. In Section 3 we will define these transformations
and discuss constraint equations required by gauge consistency of the generalized diffeomorphisms. Generically, these constraints restrict the space of configurations for which
DFT is a consistent theory, i.e. DFT is a restricted theory.
The constraints of the theory are solved in particular when a section condition or
strong constraint, is imposed. This restriction was proposed in the original formulations
of DFT, inspired by string field theory constraints. It implies that the fields of the theory
only depend on a slice of the double space parameterized by half of the coordinates, such
that there always exists a frame in which, locally, the configurations do not depend on the
dual coordinates. Since the strong constraint is covariant under the global symmetries,
the theory can still be covariantly formulated, but it is actually not truly doubled after it
is solved.
Nevertheless, one can also find other solutions to the constraints that violate the strong
constraint. In particular, Scherk-Schwarz (SS) dimensional reductions of DFT, where the
space-time fields are twisted by functions of the internal coordinates, have proven to be
interesting scenarios where consistent strong-constraint violating configurations are allowed. Interestingly enough, the SS reduction of (bosonic) DFT on the doubled space
leads to an action that can be identified with (part of) the action of the bosonic sector of
four-dimensional half-maximal gauged supergravities. Recall that gauged supergravities
are deformations of ordinary abelian supergravity theories, in which the deformation parameters (gaugings) are encoded in the embedding tensor. DFT provides a higher dimensional interpretation of these gaugings in terms of SS double T-duality twists. Moreover,
the quadratic constraints on gaugings are in one to one correspondence with the closure
constraints of the generalized diffeomorphisms.
Gauged supergravities describe superstring compactifications with fluxes, where the
gaugings correspond to the quantized fluxes. Therefore it is instructive to look at the connection between SS reductions of DFT and string flux compactifications. This connection

5

is subtle. It is known that orientifold compactifications of D = 10 effective supergravity
actions, corresponding to the low energy limit of string theories, lead to four dimensional
superpotentials in which the coefficients are the fluxes. However, by looking at flux compactifications of string theories, expected to be T-duality related (for instance, type IIA
and type IIB theories) the effective superpotentials turn out not to be T-dual. Namely,
these compactifications are gauged supergravities but with different orbits of gaugings
turned on, not connected by T-duality. By invoking symmetry arguments, it has been
suggested that new fluxes should be included in order for the full superpotentials to be
T-duals, so as to repair the mismatch. Similarly, more fluxes are required by invoking
type IIB S-duality, M-theory or heterotic/type I S-duality, etc. Then, by imposing duality invariance at the level of the four dimensional effective theory, the full (orientifold
truncated) supergravity theory is obtained with all allowed gaugings.
Hence, we can conclude that four dimensional gauged supergravity incorporates stringy
information that, generically, is not present in the reduction of a ten dimensional effective
supergravity action. Compactification of DFT contains this stringy information from
the start and provides a geometric interpretation for fluxes, even for those that are nongeometric from a supergravity point of view.
There have also been different proposals to extend DFT ideas to incorporate the full
stringy U-duality symmetry group. Take E7(7) as an example, which includes T-dualities
and strong-weak duality. The symmetrization now requires an Extended Geometry on
which one can define an Extended Field Theory (EFT). Interestingly enough, from a
string theory perspective such formulation automatically incorporates information on NSNS and R-R fields. While in DFT with O(n, n) symmetry a doubled 2n compactified
space is needed, in EFT coordinates span a mega-space with more dimensions, where SS
compactifications lead to four-dimensional gauged maximal supergravity.
Closely related to DFT (or EFT) is the framework of Generalized Geometry (or Exceptional Generalized Geometry), a program that also incorporates duality as a building
block. In Generalized Geometry (GG), the tangent space, where the vectors generating diffeomorphisms live, is enlarged to include the one-forms corresponding to gauge

6

transformations of the two-form. The internal space is not extended, but the notion of
geometry is still modified. DFT and GG are related when the section condition (which
un-doubles the double space) is imposed.

To summarize, DFT is a T-duality invariant reformulation of supergravity which appears to offer a way to go beyond the supergravity limits of string theory by introducing
some stringy features into particle physics. DFT is all about T-duality symmetries, unification and geometry. It is a rather young theory, still under development, but it has
already produced plenty of new perspectives and results. There are still many things to
understand, and the number of applications is increasing. Here we intend to review this
beautiful theory and some of its applications, in as much a pedagogical fashion as we can.

7

2

Some references and a guide to the review

In this review we intend to provide a self-contained pedagogical introduction to DFT.
We will introduce the basics of the theory in lecture-like fashion, mostly intended for
non-experts that are willing to know more about this fascinating theory. We will mainly
review the recent literature on the formulation and applications of the theory. The field
is undergoing a quick expansion, and many exciting results are still to appear. Given
the huge amount of material in this active area of research, we are forced to leave out
many developments that are as important and stimulating as those that we consider
here. With the purpose of reducing the impact of this restriction, we provide an updated
list of references, were the reader can find more specific information. We apologize if,
unintentionally, we have omitted important references.
Let us first start with a brief list of books on string theory [3]. There are already
some very good and complete reviews and lectures on this and related topics, that we
strongly suggest. In [4, 5] the reader will find a complete exposition on T-duality. Flux
compactifications are nicely reviewed in [6]. Comprehensive reports on non-geometric
fluxes and their relation to gauged supergravities are those in [7] and [8], respectively.
DFT has also been reviewed in [9], and Generalized Geometry in [10]. A complete review
on duality symmetric string and M-theory can be found in [11].
Historically, the idea of implementing T-duality as a manifest symmetry goes back
to M. Duff [12] and A. Tseytlin [13], where many of the building blocks of DFT were
introduced. In [12], one can identify already the double coordinates, the generalized
metric and frame, the notion of duality symmetric sigma models and the extension of
these concepts to U-duality. In [13], the idea of DFT was essentially present: double
coordinates were considered, an effective action for the metric in double space presented,
and the necessity of consistency constraints noted. Soon after, Siegel contributed his
pioneer work [1], in which a full duality symmetric action for the low-energy superstring
was built in superspace formalism. More recently, C. Hull and B. Zwiebach combined
their expertise on double geometry [14] and string field theory [15] to build Double Field
Theory [2]. Later, together with O. Hohm, they constructed a background independent
8

[16] and generalized metric [17] formulation of the theory. The relation of their work
to Siegel’s was analyzed in [18]. Closely related to DFT is the Generalized Geometry
introduced by N. Hitchin and M. Gualtieri [19] and related to string theory in the works
by M. Graña, T. Grimm, J. Louis, L. Martucci, R. Minasian, M. Petrini, A. Tomasiello
and D. Waldram [20], among others.
The inclusion of heterotic vector fields in the theory was discussed in [21] (see also
[22]). R-R fields and a unification of Type II theories were included in [23, 24, 25], while
the massive Type II theory was treated in [26]. The inclusion of fermions and supersymmetrization was performed in [27, 24]. There are many works devoted to explore the
geometry of DFT [28, 24, 29, 30]. A fully covariant supersymmetric Type II formulation
was constructed by I. Jeon, K. Lee and J. Park in [31]. The gauge symmetries and equations of motion were analyzed by S. Kwak [32], and the gauge algebra and constraints of
the theory were discussed in [33, 34]. The connection with duality symmetric non-linear
sigma models was established by D. Berman, N. Copland and D. Thompson in [35, 36, 37].
Many of these works were inspired by Siegel’s construction [1].
Covariant frameworks extending T-duality to the full U-duality group were built as
well. These include works by C. Hull [38], P. Pacheco and D. Waldram [39], D. Berman
and M. Perry [40], the E11 program by P. West et. al. [41] and [42, 43]. More recent DFTrelated developments can be found in [44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51]. Also in this direction,
but more related to non-geometry and gauged supergravities we have [52, 53, 54, 55].
The ideas introduced in [56, 57, 58, 59] led to the development of non-geometry, and
T-dual non-geometric fluxes were named as such in [60] (see also [61]). Later, S-dual
fluxes were introduced in [62], and finally the full U-dual set of fluxes was completed in
[52]. Fluxes were considered from a generalized geometrical point of view in [20], and also
from a double geometrical point of view in [14, 63, 64]. The relation between DFT, nongeometry and gauged supergravities was explored in [65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74].
Different world-sheet perspectives for fluxes were addressed in [75, 76, 77].
Some other developments on DFT and related works can be found in [78]. In the final
section we include more references, further developments and applications of DFT.

9

The present review covers the following topics:
• Section 3 provides a general introduction to DFT. Starting with some basics on
T-duality as a motivation, double space and generalized fields are then defined.
A generalized Lie derivative encoding usual diffeomorphisms and two-form gauge
transformations is introduced, together with its consistency constraints. We then
present the DFT action, its symmetries and equations of motion.
• Section 4 reviews the construction of an underlying double geometry for DFT.
Generalized connections, torsion, and curvatures are discussed, and their similarities
and differences with ordinary Riemannian geometry are examined.
• Section 5 is devoted to a discussion of dimensional reductions of DFT. After a brief
introduction of usual SS compactifications, the procedure is applied to deal with generalized SS compactifications of DFT. The notions of geometric and non-geometric
fluxes are addressed and the connection with gauged supergravity is established.
• Section 6 considers the U-duality extension of DFT, Extended Geometries, Extended Field Theories and their relation to maximal gauged supergravity.
• Section 7 reviews the various attempts to construct O(D, D) invariant non-linear
sigma models, and their relation to DFT.
• Section 8 provides a brief summary of different developments related to DFT (and
guiding references), together with open problems, that are not discussed in detail
in the review.

10

3

Double Field Theory

Strings feature many amazing properties that particles lack, and this manifests in the
fact that string theory has many stringy symmetries that are absent in field theories
like supergravity. Field theories usually describe the dynamics of particles, which have
no dimension. Since the string is one-dimensional, closed strings can wind around noncontractible cycles if the space is compact. So clearly, if we aimed at describing the
dynamics of strings with a field theory, the particles should be assigned more degrees
of freedom, to account for their limitations to reproduce stringy dynamics like winding.
Double Field Theory is an attempt to incorporate some stringy features into a field theory
in which the new degrees of freedom are introduced by doubling the space of coordinates.
DFT can be thought of as a T-duality invariant formulation of the “low-energy” sector
of string theory on a compact space. The reason why low-energy is quoted here is because,
although it is O(D, D) symmetric, DFT keeps the levels that would be massless in the
decompactification limit of the string spectrum. In some sense, DFT can be thought of as
a T-duality symmetrization of supergravity. Our route will begin with the NS-NS sector,
and later we will see how these ideas can be extended to the other sectors. As a starting
point, we will briefly introduce the basic notions of T-duality and supergravity, mostly in
an “informal” way, with the only purpose of introducing the fundamental concepts that
will then be applied and extended for DFT. A better and more complete exposition of
these topics can be found in the many books on string theory [3].

3.1

T-duality basics

T-duality is a symmetry of string theory that relates winding modes in a given compact
space with momentum modes in another (dual) compact space. Here we summarize the
basic ingredients of T-duality. For a complete and comprehensive review see [4].2
Consider the mass spectrum of a closed string on a circle of radius R
M 2 = (N + Ñ − 2) + p2
2

For recent progress on non-Abelian T-duality see [79].

11

2
ls2
2 ls
+
p̃
R2
R̃2

(3.1)

2

where ls is the string length scale and R̃ = lRs , the dual radius. The first terms contain
the infinite mass levels of the string spectrum, and the last two terms are proportional to
their quantized momentum p and winding p̃. The modes are constrained to satisfy the
Level Matching Condition (LMC)
N − Ñ = pp̃ ,

(3.2)

reflecting the fact that there are no special points in a closed string.
If we take the decompactification limit R ≫ ls , the winding modes become heavy, and
the mass spectrum for the momentum modes becomes a continuum. On the other hand,
if we take the opposite limit R ≪ ls , the winding modes become light and the momentum
modes heavy. These behaviors are very reasonable: if the compact space is large it would
demand a lot of energy to stretch a closed string around a large circle so that it can wind,
but very little if the space were small.
Notice that for any level, the mass spectrum is invariant under the following exchange
R
ls
R̃
↔
=
,
ls
ls
R

p ↔ p̃ ,

(3.3)

so if we could only measure masses, we would never be able to distinguish between a
closed string moving with a given momentum k on a circle of radius R, and a closed
string winding k times on a circle of radius ls2 /R. This symmetry not only holds for the
mass spectrum, but it is actually a symmetry of any observable one can imagine in the
full theory!
DFT currently restricts to the modes of the string that are massless in the decompactified limit, i.e. with N + Ñ = 2, but considers them on a compact space (actually, some
or all of these dimensions can be taken to be non-compact). These modes correspond to
the levels3 N = Ñ = 1 (notice that the LMC forbids the possibilities (N, Ñ) = (2, 0) and
(0, 2) when pp̃ = 0) corresponding to a symmetric metric gij , an antisymmetric two-form
bij and a dilaton φ.
3

For the cases (N, Ñ ) = (1, 0) and (0, 1) there is a particular enhancement of the massless degrees of

freedom at R = ls , which has not been contemplated in DFT so far.

12

The T-duality symmetry of circle compactifications is generalized to O(D, D, Z) in
toroidal compactifications with constant background metric and antisymmetric field. The
elements of the infinite discrete group O(D, D) (we will drop the Z in this review because
it is irrelevant for our purposes of introducing DFT at the classical level) can be defined
as the set of 2D × 2D matrices hM N that preserve the O(D, D) invariant metric ηM N
hM P ηP Q hN Q = ηM N
where



ηM N = 

i

0

δj

j

0

δi



 ,



j

(3.4)



0 δi
 ,
ηM N = 
i
δj 0

M
,
η M P ηP N = δN

(3.5)

raises and lowers all the O(D, D) indices M, N = 1, . . . , 2D.
The momentum and winding modes are now D-dimensional objects pi and p̃i respectively. They can be arranged into a larger object (a generalized momentum)
 
p̃i
PM =   ,
pi

(3.6)

in terms of which the mass operator becomes

M 2 = (N + Ñ − 2) + P P HP Q P Q ,
where
HM N



g ij

−g ik bkj




= 
kj
kl
bik g
gij − bik g blj

(3.7)

(3.8)

is called the generalized metric [80, 81]. The LMC now takes the form
1
N − Ñ = P M PM ,
2

(3.9)

and implies that, for the DFT states N = Ñ = 1, the generalized momenta must be
orthogonal with respect to the O(D, D) metric pi p̃i = 0.
Any element of O(D, D) can be decomposed as successive products of the following
transformations:



i
Ej 0
 ,
Diffeomorphisms : hM N = 
j
0 Ei
13

E ∈ GL(D)



δij

0



 ,
hM N = 
j
Bij δi

Shifts :

Factorized
T − dualities :



h(k) M N = 

i

Bij = −Bji

i

ij

δ j −tj

t

δi j − ti j

tij



 ,

(3.10)

t = diag(0 . . . 0 1 0 . . . 0) ,

If the antisymmetric D × D matrix Bij in the shifts were written in the North-East
block, the resulting transformation is usually called β-transformation, for reasons that
will become clear latter. The diffeomorphisms correspond to basis changes of the lattice
underlying the torus, and the factorized T-dualities generalize the lRs ↔ lR̃s symmetry
discussed above. The 1 in the D × D matrix t is in the k-th position. It is therefore
common to find statements about T-duality being performed on a given k-direction, in
which case the resulting transformations for the metric gij and two-form bij are named
Buscher rules
gkk →

1
,
gkk

gki →

bki →

gki
,
gkk

bij → bij −

bki
,
gkk

gij → gij −

gki gkj − bki bkj
,
gkk

gki bkj − bki gkj
.
gkk

(3.11)

These transformation rules were first derived by T. Buscher from a world-sheet perspective
in [82, 83], and they rely on the fact that the T-duality is performed in an isometric
direction (i.e., a direction in which the fields are constant). Notice that g and g −1 get
exchanged in the k-th direction, just as it happens in the circle with the inversion R/ls
and ls /R. Also notice that the metric (3.5) corresponds to a product of n successive
T-dualities, and for this reason this matrix is usually called the inversion metric (as we
will see, it inverts the full generalized metric (3.8)).
Summarizing, the T-duality symmetry of the circle compactification is generalized in
toroidal compactifications to O(n, n) acting as
HM N ↔ hM P HP Q hN Q ,

P M ↔ hM N P N ,
14

h ∈ O(n, n) ,

(3.12)

on constant backgrounds. More generally, T-duality in DFT is allowed in non-isometric
directions, as we will see.
Let us now consider the dilaton, on which T-duality acts non-trivially. The closed
(D)

= e−2φ , is related to the (D − 1)-dimensional coup
(D−1)
(D)
pling when one dimension is compactified on a circle as gs
= R/ls gs . Given that
string coupling in D-dimensions, gs

the scattering amplitudes for the dilaton states are invariant under T-duality, so must
be the (D − 1)-dimensional coupling. Therefore, the dilaton of two theories compacti-

fied on circles of dual radii R and ls2 /R must be related. When the compact space is
n-dimensional, the T-duality invariant d is given by the following combination
e−2d =

√

ge−2φ

(3.13)

This intriguing symmetry of string theory is not inherited by the fully decompactified
low energy effective theory (supergravity), because all the winding modes are infinitely
heavy and play no role in the low energy dynamics. Therefore, decompactified supergravity describes the “particle limit” of the massless modes of the string. However, it
is likely that a fully compactified supergravity in D-dimensions (i.e. where all dimensions are compact, and then D = n) can be rewritten in a T-duality, or more generally
O(D, D) covariant way, such that the symmetry becomes manifest at the level of the
field theory. Then, DFT can be thought of as a T-duality invariant formulation of supergravity with compact dimensions. Actually, as we will see, DFT is more general than
just a compactification of a fully decompactified theory (where the winding modes have
been integrated out). The generalization relies on the fact that the winding dynamics
is kept from the beginning, and at low-energies winding modes only decouple when the
corresponding directions of the fully compactified theory are decompactified.
In order to begin with the construction of DFT, it is instructive to first introduce
supergravity in D decompactified dimensions.

15

3.2

Supergravity basics

Before trying to assemble the NS-NS sector of supergravity in a T-duality invariant formulation, let us briefly review the bosonic sector of the theory that we will then try
to covariantize. The degrees of freedom are contained in a D-dimensional metric (of
course, we always keep in mind that the relevant dimension is D = 10) gij = g(ij) , with
i, j, · · · = 1, . . . , D, a D-dimensional two-form bij = b[ij] (also known as the b-field or the
Kalb-Ramond field) and a dilaton φ. All these fields depend on the D coordinates of
space-time xi .
There is a pair of local gauge transformations under which the physics does not change:
• Diffeomorphisms, or change of coordinates, parameterized by infinitesimal vectors
λi

gij → gij + Lλ gij ,

Lλ gij = λk ∂k gij + gkj ∂i λk + gik ∂j λk ,

bij → bij + Lλ bij ,

Lλ bij = λk ∂k bij + bkj ∂i λk + bik ∂j λk ,

φ → φ + Lλ φ ,

Lλ φ = λi ∂i φ .

(3.14)

Here Lλ is the Lie derivative, defined as follows for arbitrary vectors V i
Lλ V i = λj ∂j V i − V j ∂j λi = [λ, V ]i

(3.15)

In the last equality we have defined the Lie Bracket, which is antisymmetric and
satisfies the Jacobi identity. It is very important to keep the Lie derivative in mind,
because it will be generalized later, and the resulting generalized Lie derivative is
one of the building blocks of DFT. The action of the Lie derivative amounts to
diffeomorphic transformations, and the invariance of the action signals the fact that
the physics remains unchanged under a change of coordinates.
• Gauge transformations of the two-form, parameterized by infinitesimal one-forms λ̃i
bij → bij + ∂i λ̃j − ∂j λ̃i .

16

(3.16)

The supergravity action takes the following form


Z
1 ijk
D √ −2φ
2
S =
d x ge
R + 4(∂φ) − H Hijk ,
12

(3.17)

where we have defined the following three-form with corresponding Bianchi identity (BI)
Hijk = 3∂[i bjk] ,

∂[i Hjkl] = 0 ,

(3.18)

and R is the Ricci scalar constructed from gij in the usual Riemannian sense. It is an
instructive warm-up exercise to show that this action is invariant under diffeomorphisms
(3.14) and the two-form gauge transformations (3.16).
The equations of motion derived from the supergravity action take the form
1
Rij − Hi pq Hjpq + 2∇i ∇j φ = 0
4

(3.19)

1 p
∇ Hpij − Hpij ∇p φ = 0 ,
2

(3.20)


1
R + 4 ∇i ∇i φ − (∂φ)2 − H 2 = 0
12

(3.21)

From the string theory point of view, they imply the Weyl invariance of the theory at the
one loop quantum level.
We have described in this section the bosonic NS-NS sector of supergravity. This
sector is interesting on its own because it determines the moduli space of the theory.
Given that the fermions are charged with respect to the Lorentz group, for any given
configuration the vacuum expectation value (VEV) of a fermion would break Lorentz
invariance. In order to preserve this celebrated symmetry, one considers vacua in which
the fermions have vanishing VEV. For this reason, and also for simplicity, in this review
we will restrict to bosonic degrees of freedom.

3.3

Double space and generalized fields

So far we have introduced the basic field-theoretical notions of supergravity, and explained
the importance of T-duality in string theory. It is now time to start exploring how the
17

supergravity degrees of freedom can be rearranged in a T-duality invariant formulation
of DFT [2]. For this to occur, we must put everything in T-duality representations, i.e.,
in objects that have well-defined transformation properties under T-duality.
Let us begin with the fields. As mentioned, we consider on the one hand a metric gij
and a two-form bij which can combine into a symmetric generalized metric HM N given by


g ij
−g ik bkj
.
HM N = 
(3.22)
kj
kl
bik g
gij − bik g blj
Notice that this metric has the same form as the one defined in (3.8) but here the
fields are non-constant. This is an O(D, D) element, and its inverse is obtained by raising
the indices with the O(D, D) metric η M P introduced in (3.5)
H ∈ O(D, D) ,

HM N = η M P HP Q η QP ,

N
.
HM P HP N = δM

(3.23)

Actually, all the indices in DFT are raised and lowered with the O(D, D) invariant metric
(3.5). On the other hand the dilaton φ is combined with the determinant of the metric g
in an O(D, D) scalar d
e−2d =

√

ge−2φ .

(3.24)

Before showing how these objects transform under local and global symmetries, let us
mention where these generalized fields are defined. Since everything must be organized
in T-duality representations, the coordinates cannot be an exception. Paradoxically, we
only have D of them: xi , while the lowest dimensional representation of O(D, D) is the
fundamental, which has dimension 2D. We therefore face the question of what should
we combine the supergravity coordinates with, in order to complete the fundamental
representation. It turns out that there are no such objects in supergravity, so we must
introduce new coordinates x̃i . We can now define a generalized notion of coordinates
X M = (x̃i , xi ) ,

(3.25)

and demand that the generalized fields depend on this double set of coordinates
HM N (X) ,
18

d(X) .

(3.26)

From the point of view of compactifications on tori, these coordinates correspond to the
Fourier duals to the generalized momenta P M (3.6). However, here we will consider more
generally a background independent formulation [16] in which the generalized metric [17]
can be defined on more general backgrounds.
It is important to recall that here the coordinates can either parameterize compact or
non-compact directions indistinctively. Even if non-compact, one can still formulate a full
O(D, D) covariant theory. In this case, the duals to the non-compact directions are just
ineffective, and one can simply assume that nothing depends on them. This will become
clear later, when we consider DFT in the context of four-dimensional effective theories.
For the moment, this distinction is irrelevant.
Being in the fundamental representation, the coordinates rotate under O(D, D) as
follows
X M → hM N X N ,

h ∈ O(D, D) ,

(3.27)

so they mix under these global transformations. Given that xi and x̃i are related by
T-duality, the later are usually referred to as dual coordinates. Under O(D, D) transformations, the fields change as follows
HM N (X) → hM P hN Q HP Q (h X) ,

d(X) → d(h X) .

(3.28)

In the particular case in which h corresponds to T-dualities (3.10) in isometric directions
(i.e. in directions in which the fields have no coordinate dependence), these transformations reproduce the Buscher rules (3.11) and (3.13) for gij , bij and φ. It can be shown that
the different components of (3.28) are equivalent to (3.11), which were derived assuming
T-duality is performed along an isometry. More generally, the transformation rules (3.28)
admit the possibility of performing T-duality in non-isometric directions [14], the reason
being that DFT is defined on a double space, so contrary to what happens in supergravity, if a T-duality hits a non-isometric direction the result is simply that the resulting
configuration will depend on the T-dual coordinate.
The reader might be quite confused at this point, wondering what these dual coordinates correspond to in the supergravity picture. Well, they simply have no meaning from
19

a supergravity point of view. Then, there must be some mechanism to constrain the coordinate dependence, and moreover since we want a T-duality invariant formulation, such
constraint must be duality invariant. The constraint in question goes under many names
in the literature, the most common ones being strong constraint or section condition. This
restriction consists of a differential equation
η M N ∂M ∂N (. . . ) = 0

(3.29)

where ηM N is the O(D, D) invariant metric introduced in (3.5). For later convenience we
recast it as
Y M P N Q ∂M ∂N (. . . ) = 0 ,

(3.30)

where we have introduced the tensor
Y M P N Q = η M N ηP Q

(3.31)

following the notation in [45], which is very useful to explore generalizations of DFT to
more general U-duality groups, as we will see in Section 6. The dots in (3.30) represent
any field or gauge parameter, and also products of them. Notice that since the tensor Y is
an O(D, D) invariant, so is the constraint. This means that if a given configuration solves
the strong constraint, any T-duality transformation of it will also do. When written in
components, the constraint takes the form
∂˜i ∂i (. . . ) = 0 ,

(3.32)

so a possible solution is ∂˜i (. . . ) = 0, or any O(D, D) rotation of this. Actually, it can
be proven that this is the only solution. Therefore, even if formally in this formulation
the fields depend on the double set of coordinates, when the strong constraint is imposed
the only possible configurations allowed by it depend on a D-dimensional section of the
space. When this section corresponds to the xi coordinates of supergravity (i.e., when all
fields and gauge parameters are annihilated by ∂˜i ), we will say that the strong constraint
is solved in the supergravity frame.
When DFT is evaluated on tori, a weaker version of the strong constraint can be
related to the LMC (3.9). In this case, the generalized fields must be expanded in the
20

modes of the double torus exp(iX M PM ), such that when the derivatives hit the mode

expansion, the LMC contraction P M PM makes its appearance. Here we will pursue

background independence, and moreover we will later deal with twisted double-tori only
up to the zero mode, so the level matching condition should not be identified with the
strong constraint (or any weaker version) in this review. We will be more specific on this
point in Section 5.
Throughout this review we will not necessarily impose the strong constraint, and in
many occasions we will explicitly write the terms that would vanish when it is imposed.
The reader can choose whether she wants to impose it or not. Only when we intend to
compare with supergravity in D dimensions we will explicitly impose the strong constraint
and choose the supergravity frame (in these cases we will mention this explicitly). The
relevance of dealing with configurations that violate the strong constraint will become
apparent when we get to the point of analyzing dimensional reductions of DFT, and
the risks of going beyond supergravity will be properly explained and emphasized. Let
us emphasize that DFT is a restricted theory though, so one cannot just relax it and
consider generic configurations: the consistency constraints of the theory are imposed by
demanding closure of the gauge transformations, as we will discuss later. These closure
constraints are solved in particular by the solutions to the strong constraint, but other
solutions exist, and then it is convenient to stay as general as possible.

3.4

Generalized Lie derivative

We have seen that the D-dimensional metric and two-form field transform under diffeomorphisms (3.14) and that the two-form also enjoys a gauge symmetry (3.16). These
fields have been unified into a single object called generalized metric (3.22), and then
one wonders whether there are generalized diffeomorphisms unifying the usual diffeomorphisms (3.14) and gauge transformations (3.16). Since the former are parameterized by
a D-dimensional vector, and the latter by a D-dimensional one-form, one can think of
considering a generalized gauge parameter
ξ M = (λ̃i , λi ) .
21

(3.33)

Then, the generalized diffeomorphisms and gauge transformations of the two-form can be
unified as

Lξ e−2d = ∂M ξ M e−2d ,

(3.34)

Lξ HM N = Lξ HM N + Y R M P Q ∂ Q ξP HRN + Y R N P Q ∂ Q ξP HM R ,

(3.35)

where Lξ is the Lie derivative (3.15) in 2D-dimensions, and Y , already defined in (3.31),
measures the departure from conventional Riemannian geometry. We see here that e−2d
transforms as a density, and as such it will correspond to the integration measure when
we deal with the action. When the generalized metric is parameterized as in (3.22) in
terms of gij and bij , and the strong constraint is imposed in the supergravity frame (i.e.,
when ∂˜i = 0), the different components of (3.35) yield
Lξ gij = Lλ gij ,

(3.36)

Lξ bij = Lλ bij + 2 ∂[i λ̃j] ,

(3.37)

and then the local transformations of supergravity (3.14)-(3.16) are recovered. The generalization of the usual Lie derivative with the addition of the term with Y is not only
essential in order to recover the standard transformations of the bosonic NS-NS sector of
supergravity, but also to preserve the O(D, D) metric
Lξ ηM N = 0 .

(3.38)

To end this discussion, we present the general form of the generalized Lie derivative
with respect to a vector ξ acting on a tensorial density V M with weight ω(V ), which is
given by the following gauge transformation
Lξ V M = ξ P ∂P V M + (∂ M ξP − ∂P ξ M )V P + ω(V )∂P ξ P V M .

(3.39)

This expression is trivially extended to other tensors with different index structure. In
particular, when this is applied to e−2d with ω(e−2d ) = 1 and HM N with ω(H) = 0, the
transformations (3.34) and (3.35) are respectively recovered. As we will discuss in the
next section, closure of these generalized diffeomorphisms imposes differential constraints
on the theory.
22

Let us finally highlight that the action of these generalized diffeomorphisms has been
defined when transforming tensorial quantities. Notice however that, for example, the
derivative of a vector ∂M V N is non-tensorial. It is then instructive to denote its transformation as
δξ (∂M V N ) = ∂M (δξ V N ) = ∂M (Lξ V N )

(3.40)

where we have used that the transformation of a vector is dictated by the generalized
Lie derivative (3.39). One can however extend the definition of the generalized diffeomorphisms Lξ , to act on non-tensorial quantities as if they were actually tensorial. Since δξ
represents the actual transformation, one can define the failure of any object to transform
covariantly as
∆ξ ≡ δξ − Lξ ,

(3.41)

such that when acting on tensors, say V M , one finds
∆ξ V M = δξ V M − Lξ V M = 0 ,

(3.42)

or equivalently, for any non-tensorial quantity, say W M , we have
δξ W M = Lξ W M + ∆ξ W M .

(3.43)

This notation is very useful for the analysis of the consistency constraints of the theory,
to which we now move.

3.5

Consistency constraints

Given the structure of generalized diffeomorphisms (3.35), one must check that they
actually define a closed group [33]. This requires, in particular, that two successive gauge
transformations parameterized by ξ1 and ξ2 , acting on a given field ξ3 , must reproduce
a new gauge transformation parameterized by some given ξ12 (ξ1 , ξ2 ) acting on the same
vector


∆123 M = −∆ξ1 Lξ2 ξ3M = ([Lξ1 , Lξ2 ] − Lξ12 ) ξ3M = 0 ,

(3.44)

where we have defined ∆ξ as in (3.41). In other words, the generalized Lie derivative must
send tensors into tensors. The resulting parameter is given by
ξ12 = Lξ1 ξ2 ,
23

(3.45)

provided the following constraint holds
∆123 M = Y P R Q S


R
2∂P ξ[1
∂Q ξ2]M ξ3S − ∂P ξ1R ξ2S ∂Q ξ3M = 0 .

(3.46)

This was written here for vectors with vanishing weight, for simplicity. The parameter
ξ12 goes under the name of D-bracket, and its antisymmetric part is named C-bracket
1
Q
M
∂P ξ2]N .
ξ[12]
= [[ξ1 , ξ2 ]]M = (Lξ1 ξ2M − Lξ2 ξ1M ) = [ξ1 , ξ2 ]M + Y M N P Q ξ[1
2

(3.47)

It corresponds to an extension of the Lie bracket (3.15), since it contains a correction
proportional to the invariant Y , which in turn corrects the Lie derivative. Respectively,
the D and C-bracket reduce to the Dorfman and Courant brackets [84] when the strong
constraint is imposed in the supergravity frame. Under the constraint (3.46), the following
relation holds
[Lξ1 , Lξ2 ] = L[[ξ1 , ξ2 ]] .

(3.48)

Notice also that symmetrizing (3.44), we find the so-called Leibniz rule (which arises here
as a constraint)
L((ξ1 , ξ2 )) = 0 ,

((ξ1 , ξ2 )) = ξ(12) .

(3.49)

The D-bracket, which satisfies the Jacobi identity, then contains a symmetric piece that
must generate trivial gauge transformations. This fact is important because on the other
hand, the C-bracket, which is antisymmetric, has a non-vanishing Jacobiator
J(ξ1 , ξ2 , ξ3) = [[[[ξ1 , ξ2 ]], ξ3 ]] + cyclic .

(3.50)

However, using (3.48) and (3.49), one can rapidly show that [45]
1
J(ξ1 , ξ2, ξ3 ) = (([[ξ1 , ξ2 ]], ξ3 )) + cyclic ,
3

(3.51)

and then the Jacobiator generates trivial gauge transformations by virtue of (3.49).
The condition (3.44) poses severe consistency constraints on the generalized diffeomorphisms (i.e. their possible generalized gauge parameters). Therefore, DFT is a constrained
or restricted theory. The generalized gauge parameters cannot be generic, but must be
constrained to solve (3.44). Supergravity is safe from this problem, because the usual
24

D-dimensional diffeomorphisms and two-form gauge transformations do form a group.
It is then to be expected that under the imposition of the strong constraint, (3.44) is
automatically satisfied. This is trivial from (3.46) because all of its terms are of the
form (3.30), but more generally these equations leave room for strong constraint-violating
configurations [66, 67, 34], as we will see later.

3.6

The action

The NS-NS sector of DFT has an action from which one can derive equations of motion.
Before showing its explicit form, let us introduce some objects that will be useful later.
The generalized metric can be decomposed as
HM N = E Ā M SĀB̄ E B̄ N ,

(3.52)

with an O(D, D) generalized frame
ηM N = E Ā M ηĀB̄ E B̄ N ,

(3.53)

where ηĀB̄ raises and lowers flat indices and takes the same form as ηM N (3.5). The
generalized frame E Ā M transforms as follows under generalized diffeomorphisms
Lξ E Ā M = ξ P ∂P E Ā M + (∂M ξ P − ∂ P ξM ) E Ā P ,

(3.54)

and can be parameterized in terms of the vielbein of the D-dimensional metric gij =
eā i sāb̄ eb̄ j , where sāb̄ = diag(− + · · · +) is the D-dimensional Minkowski metric, as




i
j
āb̄
eā eā bji
s
0
.
 ,
E Ā M = 
(3.55)
SĀB̄ = 
0
eā i
0 sāb̄
Since the Minkowski metric is invariant under Lorentz transformations O(1, D − 1), the

metric SĀB̄ is invariant under double Lorentz transformations
H = O(1, D − 1) × O(1, D − 1)

(3.56)

which correspond to the maximal (pseudo-)compact subgroup of G = O(D, D). Therefore, the generalized metric is invariant under local double Lorentz transformations, and
25

thus it parameterizes the coset G/H. The dimension of the coset is D 2 , and this allows to
accommodate a symmetric D-dimensional metric gij and an antisymmetric D-dimensional
two-form bij , as we have seen. Technically, the triangular parametrization of the generalized frame would break down under a T-duality, and then one has to restore the triangular
gauge through an H-transformation. From the generalized frame EĀ M and dilaton d one
can build the generalized fluxes
FĀB̄ C̄ = EC̄M LEĀ EB̄ M = 3Ω[ĀB̄ C̄] ,

(3.57)

FĀ = −e2d LEĀ e−2d = ΩB̄ B̄Ā + 2EĀ M ∂M d ,

(3.58)

out of the following object
ΩĀB̄C̄ = EĀ M ∂M EB̄ N EC̄N = −ΩĀC̄ B̄ ,

(3.59)

that will be referred to as the generalized Weitzenböck connection.
Since all these objects are written in planar indices, they are manifestly O(D, D) invariant, so any combination of them will also be. The generalized fluxes (3.57)-(3.58)
depend on the fields and are therefore dynamical. Later, when we analyze compactifications of the theory, they will play an important role, for they will be related to the
covariant quantities in the effective action, and will moreover reduce to the usual constant
fluxes, or gaugings in the lower dimensional theory, hence the name generalized fluxes.
The generalized frame and dilaton enter in the action of DFT only through the dynamical fluxes (3.57) and (3.58). Indeed, up to total derivatives, the action takes the
form
S =

Z

dXe−2d R ,

(3.60)

with


1 ĀD̄ B̄Ē C̄ F̄
1
1
R = FĀB̄ C̄ FD̄Ē F̄
S η η − S ĀD̄ S B̄Ē S C̄ F̄ − η ĀD̄ η B̄ Ē η C̄ F̄
4
12
6


+ FĀ FB̄ η ĀB̄ − S ĀB̄ .


(3.61)

In this formulation, it takes the same form as the scalar potential of half-maximal supergravity in four dimensions. We will be more specific about this later, but for the readers
26

who are familiar with gauged supergravities, notice that identifying here the dynamical
fluxes with gaugings and the SĀB̄ matrix with the moduli scalar matrix, this action resembles the form of the scalar potential of [85]. This frame formulation was introduced
in [1], later related to other formulations in [18], and also discussed in [69].
Written in this form, the O(D, D) invariance is manifest. However, some local symmetries are hidden and the invariance of the action must be explicitly verified. Under
generalized diffeomorphisms, the dynamical fluxes transform as
δξ FĀB̄ C̄ = ξ D̄ ∂D̄ FĀB̄ C̄ + ∆ξĀB̄ C̄ ,
δξ FĀ = ξ D̄ ∂D̄ FĀ + ∆ξĀ ,

(3.62)

where
∆ξĀB̄C̄ = 4ZĀB̄ C̄ D̄ ξ D̄ + 3∂D̄ ξ[Ā ΩD̄ B̄ C̄] ,
∆ξĀ = ZĀB̄ ξ B̄ + F B̄ ∂B̄ ξĀ − ∂ B̄ ∂B̄ ξĀ + ΩC̄ ĀB̄ ∂C̄ ξ B̄ ,

(3.63)

and we have defined
3
3
ZĀB̄C̄ D̄ = ∂[Ā FB̄C̄ D̄] − F[ĀB̄ Ē FC̄ D̄]Ē = − ΩĒ[ĀB̄ ΩĒ C̄ D̄] ,
4
4
ZĀB̄ = ∂ C̄ FC̄ ĀB̄ + 2∂[Ā FB̄] − F C̄ FC̄ ĀB̄ =

(3.64)


∂ M ∂M E[Ā N EB̄]N − 2ΩC̄ ĀB̄ ∂C̄ d .

The vanishing of (3.63) follows from the closure conditions (3.44), precisely because the
dynamical fluxes are defined through generalized diffeomorphisms (3.57), (3.58)
∆ξ FĀB̄C̄ = ∆ξĀB̄C̄ = EC̄M ∆ξ (LEĀ EB̄ M ) = 0 ,
∆ξ FĀ = ∆ξĀ = −e2d ∆ξ (LEĀ e−2d ) = 0 .

(3.65)

Therefore, the dynamical fluxes in flat indices transform as scalars under generalized
diffeomorphisms.
Let us now argue that due to the closure constraints (3.65), the action of DFT is
invariant under generalized diffeomorphisms. In fact, since e−2d transforms as a density
(recall (3.34))
δξ e−2d = ∂P (ξ P e−2d ) ,
27

(3.66)

for the action to be invariant under generalized diffeomorphisms, R must transform as
a scalar. Using the gauge transformation rules for the generalized fluxes (3.62) together
with (3.65) one arrives at the following result
δξ R = Lξ R = ξ P ∂P R .

(3.67)

Combining (3.66) with (3.67), it can be checked that the Lagrangian density e−2d R
transforms as a total derivative, and then the action (3.60) is invariant.
We have seen that in addition to generalized diffeomorphisms, the theory must be
invariant under local double Lorentz transformations (3.56) parameterized by an infinitesimal ΛĀ B̄ . This parameter must be antisymmetric ΛĀB̄ = −ΛB̄ Ā to guarantee the invari-

ance of ηĀB̄ and it must also satisfy SĀ C̄ ΛC̄ B̄ = ΛĀC̄ S C̄ B̄ to guarantee the invariance of
SĀB̄ . The frame transforms as
δΛ EĀ M = ΛĀ B̄ EB̄ M ,

(3.68)

and this guarantees that the generalized metric is invariant. The invariance of the action
is, however, less clear, and a short computation shows that
Z
δΛ S = dX e−2d ZĀC̄ ΛB̄ C̄ (η ĀB̄ − S ĀB̄ ) ,

(3.69)

with ZĀB̄ defined in (3.64). Then, the invariance of the action (3.60) under double Lorentz
transformations (3.68) is also guaranteed from closure, since
ZĀB̄ = ∆EĀ FB̄ = 0 .

(3.70)

As happens with all the constraints in DFT, which follow from (3.44), they are solved
by the strong constraint but admit more general solutions (this can be seen especially
in (3.46) where cancelations could occur without demanding each contribution to vanish
independently).
This flux formulation of DFT is a small extension of the generalized metric formulation
introduced in [17]. It incorporates terms that would vanish under the imposition of the
strong constraint in a covariant way. After some algebra, it can be shown that the action

28

(3.60) can be recast in the form

Z
−2d
4 HM N ∂M ∂N d − ∂M ∂N HM N − 4 HM N ∂M d ∂N d + 4∂M HM N ∂N d
S = dXe

1 MN
1 MN
KL
KL
+ H ∂M H ∂N HKL − H ∂M H ∂K HN L + ∆(SC) R ,
8
2

(3.71)

up to total derivatives. Here, we have separated all terms in (3.60) that vanish under
the imposition of the strong constraint ∆(SC) R, to facilitate the comparison with the
generalized metric formulation [17].
To conclude this section, we recall that in order to recover the supergravity action
(3.17), the strong constraint must be imposed in the supergravity frame. Then, when
∂˜i = 0 is imposed on (3.71), and the generalized metric is parameterized in terms of the
D-dimensional metric and two-form as in (3.22), the DFT action (3.71) reproduces (3.17)
exactly.

3.7

Equations of motion

The equations of motion in DFT were extensively discussed in [32] for different formulations of the theory. For the flux formulation we have just presented, the variation of the
action with respect to EĀ M and to d takes the form
Z
δE S =
dX e−2d G ĀB̄ δEĀB̄ ,
δd S =

Z

dX e−2d Gδd ,

(3.72)
(3.73)

where
δEĀB̄ = δEĀ M EB̄M = −δEB̄ Ā ,

(3.74)

to incorporate the fact that the generalized bein preserves the O(D, D) metric (3.5). It
can easily be checked that the variations of the generalized fluxes are given by


δE FĀB̄C̄ = 3 ∂[Ā δEB̄ C̄] + δE[Ā D̄ FB̄C̄]D̄ ,
δE FĀ = ∂ B̄ δEB̄Ā + δEĀ B̄ FB̄ ,
29

(3.75)
(3.76)

δd FĀ = 2∂Ā δd .

(3.77)

We then obtain
G [ĀB̄] = 2(S D̄[Ā − η D̄[Ā )∂ B̄] FD̄ + (FD̄ − ∂D̄ )F̌ D̄[ĀB̄] + F̌ C̄ D̄[Ā FC̄ D̄ B̄] ,
G = −2R ,

(3.78)
(3.79)

where
3
1
F̌ ĀB̄C̄ = FD̄ B̄C̄ S ĀD̄ − FD̄Ē F̄ S ĀD̄ S B̄Ē S C̄ F̄ − F ĀB̄ C̄ .
2
2

(3.80)

The equations of motion are then
G [ĀB̄] = 0 ,

G = 0.

(3.81)

Upon decomposing these equations in components, and standing in the supergravity frame
of the strong constraint, one recovers the equations of motion of supergravity (3.19)-(3.21),
provided the generalized frame is parameterized as in (3.55).
For completeness let us also mention that had we varied the action in the generalized
metric formulation (3.71) with respect to the generalized metric (and setting to zero the
strong-constraint-like terms), we would have found [17], [32]
Z
δH S = dXe−2d δHM N KM N ,

(3.82)

with
KM N =

1
1
∂M HKL ∂N HKL − (∂L − 2(∂L d))(HLK ∂K HM N ) + 2∂M ∂N d
(3.83)
8
4
1
1
− ∂(M | HKL ∂L H|N )K + (∂L − 2(∂L d))(HKL ∂(M HN )K + HK (M | ∂K HL |N ) ) .
2
2

Notice however, that the variations δHM N are not generic, but must be subjected to
constraints inherited from (3.23). This implies that only some projections of KM N give
the equations of motion, through a generalized Ricci flatness equation:
b M N = P̂(M P P̌N ) Q KP Q = 0 ,
R

(3.84)

where we introduced some projectors that will be useful in the following section
1
P̌M N = (ηM N + HM N ) .
2

1
P̂M N = (ηM N − HM N ) ,
2
30

(3.85)

Finally, imposing the strong constraint to (3.81) they can be taken to the form (3.84).
These equations of motion will be revisited in the next section from a geometrical
point of view.

31

4

Double Geometry

We have explored the basics of the bosonic NS-NS sector of DFT, starting from its degrees
of freedom, the double space on which it is defined, its consistency constraints, the action
and equations of motion, etc. In particular, the action was tendentiously written in terms
of a generalized Ricci scalar and the equations of motion were cast in a generalized Ricci
flatness form. But, is there some underlying geometry? Can DFT be formulated in
a more fundamental (generalized) geometrical way? It turns out that there is such a
formulation, but it differs from the Riemannian geometry out of which General Relativity
is constructed. We find it instructive to begin this section with a basic review of the
notions of Riemannian geometry that will then be generalized for DFT.

4.1

Riemannian geometry basics

Even though General Relativity follows from an action of the form
Z
√
S = dx g R ,

(4.1)

where R is the Ricci scalar and g the determinant of the metric, we know that there exists
an underlying geometry out of which this theory can be obtained. The starting point can
be taken to be the Lie derivative (3.15)
Lξ V i = ξ k ∂k V i − ∂k ξ i V k .

(4.2)

The derivative of a vector is non-tensorial under the diffeomorphisms (4.2), so one starts
by introducing a covariant derivative
∇i V j = ∂i V j + Γik j V k ,

(4.3)

defined in terms of a Christoffel connection Γ, whose purpose is to compensate the failure
of the derivative to transform as a tensor. Therefore, the failure to transform as a tensor
under diffeomorphisms parameterized by ξ, denoted by ∆ξ , is given by
∆ξ Γij k = ∂i ∂j ξ k .
32

(4.4)

The torsion can be defined through
k
k i j
Tij k ξ i V j = (L∇
ξ − Lξ )V = 2Γ[ij] ξ V .

(4.5)

The superscript ∇ is just notation to indicate that, in the Lie derivative, the partial
derivatives should be replaced by covariant derivatives. A condition to be satisfied in
Riemannian geometry is covariant constancy of the metric gij . It receives the name of
metric compatibility
∇i gjk = ∂i gjk − Γij l glk − Γik l gjl = 0 .

(4.6)

This fixes the symmetric part of the connection
1
Γ(ij) k = g kl (∂i gjl + ∂j gil − ∂l gij ) − gm(i Tj)l m g lk .
2

(4.7)

When the connection is torsionless
Tij k = 2Γ[ij]k = 0 ,

(4.8)

it is named Levi-Civita. Notice that the Levi-Civita connection is symmetric and completely fixed by metric compatibility (4.7) in terms of the degrees of freedom of General
Relativity, namely the metric gij
1
Γij k = g kl (∂i gjl + ∂j gil − ∂l gij ) .
2

(4.9)

Let us note that the Levi-Civita connection satisfies the partial integration rule in the
√
presence of the measure g
Z
Z
√
√
i
(4.10)
dx g U∇i V = − dx g V i ∇i U ,
given that its trace satisfies
1 √
Γki k = √ ∂i g .
g

(4.11)

In a vielbein formulation, one also introduces a spin connection Wiā b̄ so that
∇i eā j = ∂i eā j + Γik j eā k − Wiā b̄ eb̄ j ,
33

(4.12)

and compatibility with the vielbein: ∇i eā j = 0, relates the Christoffel connection with
the Weitzenböck connection
Ωāb̄ c̄ = eā i ∂i eb̄ j ec̄ j ,

(4.13)

Wiā b̄ = Ωc̄ā b̄ ec̄ i + Γij k eā j eb̄ k .

(4.14)

through

For future reference, we also introduce the notion of dynamical Scherk-Schwarz flux,
defined by the Lie derivative as
ec̄ i Leā eb̄ i = fāb̄ c̄ = 2Ω[āb̄] c̄ .

(4.15)

Notice the analogy with the generalized fluxes (3.57) defined in terms of the generalized
Lie derivative (3.39). Then, the projection of the torsionless spin connection to the space
of fluxes (i.e., its antisymmetrization in the first two indices) is proportional to the fluxes,
given that the projection of the Levi-Civita connection to this space vanishes. In fact, it
can be shown that in general
eā i Wib̄ c̄ =


1  c̄
¯
¯
fāb̄ + sād¯sc̄ē fēb̄ d + sb̄d¯sc̄ē fēā d .
2

(4.16)

Then, the spin connection is fully expressible in terms of dynamical Scherk-Schwarz fluxes.

Having introduced the connections and their properties, we now turn to curvatures.
The commutator of two covariant derivatives reads
[∇i , ∇j ]V k = Rijl k V l − Tij l ∇l V k ,

(4.17)

Rijl k = ∂i Γjl k − ∂j Γil k + Γim k Γjl m − Γjm k Γil m

(4.18)

with

the Riemann tensor, which is covariant under Lie derivatives. It takes the same form
when it is written in terms of the spin connection
Rijā b̄ = Rijk l eā k eb̄ l = ∂i Wjā b̄ − ∂j Wiā b̄ + Wic̄ b̄ Wjā c̄ − Wjc̄ b̄ Wiā c̄ ,

(4.19)

and it has the following properties in the absence of torsion
Rijlk = Rijl m gmk = R([ij][lk]) ,
34

R[ijl]k = 0 ,

(4.20)

the latter known as Bianchi Identity (BI). The Riemann tensor is a very powerful object in
the sense that it dictates how tensors are parallel-transported, and for this reason it is also
known as the curvature tensor. Tracing the Riemann tensor, one obtains the (symmetric)
Ricci tensor
Rij = Rikj k = Rji ,

(4.21)

and tracing further leads to the Ricci scalar
R = g ij Rij .

(4.22)

The later defines the object out of which the action of General Relativity (4.1) is built,
while the vanishing of the former gives the equations of motion
Rij = 0 .

(4.23)

This equation is known as Ricci flatness, and the solutions to these equations are said to
be Ricci flat. Note that the Riemann and Ricci tensors and the Ricci scalar are completely
defined for a torsionless and metric compatible connection in terms of the metric.
Before turning to the generalizations of these objects needed for DFT, let us mention
that combining the above results, the action of General Relativity can be written purely
in terms of dynamical Scherk-Schwarz fluxes as
Z
h
i
1
√
b̄ ē ād¯
ād¯ b̄ē
f¯
ā d¯ b̄ē
c̄
S=
dx g fāb̄ fdē
4δc̄ δf¯s − 2δf¯δc̄ s − s s sc̄f¯ .
¯
4

(4.24)

This is also analog to the situation in DFT (3.61).

4.2

Generalized connections and torsion

Some of the ingredients discussed in the last subsection, already found their generalized analogs in previous sections. For example, the Lie derivative (4.2) has already been
extended to its generalized version in double geometry in (3.39). The Weitzenböck connection (4.13) has also been generalized in (3.59), and out of it, so have the fluxes (3.57)
been extended to (4.15). Moreover, the actions (4.24) and (3.61) were both shown to be

35

expressible in terms of fluxes. So, how far can we go? The aim of this section is to continue with the comparison, in order to find similarities and differences between the usual
Riemannian geometry and double geometry. This is mostly based on [1, 18, 28, 24, 29].
Having defined a generalized Lie derivative, it is natural to seek a covariant derivative.
We consider one of the form
∇M VĀ N = ∂M VĀ N + ΓM P N VĀ P − WM Ā B̄ VB̄ N ,

(4.25)

with trivial extension to tensors with more indices. Here we have introduced a Christoffel
connection Γ and a spin connection W whose transformation properties must compensate the failure of the partial derivative of a tensor to transform covariantly both under
generalized diffeomorphisms and double Lorentz transformations.
We can now demand some properties on the connections, as we did in the Riemannian
geometry construction. Let us analyze the implications of the following conditions:
• Compatibility with the generalized frame
∇M EĀ N = 0 .

(4.26)

As in conventional Riemannian geometry, this simply relates the Christoffel connection with the spin connection through
WM Ā B̄ = E C̄ M ΩC̄ Ā B̄ + ΓM N P EĀ N E B̄ P ,

(4.27)

where we have written the Weitzenböck connection defined in (3.59), which is totally
determined by the generalized frame. Then, this condition simply says that if some
components of the spin (Christoffel) connection were determined, the corresponding
components of the Christoffel (spin) connection would also be.
• Compatibility with the O(D, D) invariant metric
∇M η P Q = 2ΓM (P Q) = 0 .

(4.28)

This simply states that the Christoffel connection must be antisymmetric in its two
last indices
ΓM N P = −ΓM P N
36

(4.29)

Notice that, since we have seen in (3.59) that the Weitzenböck connection satisfies
this property as well, due to (4.27) so does the spin connection
WM ĀB̄ = −WM B̄ Ā .

(4.30)

• Compatibility with the generalized metric
∇M HP Q = ∂M HP Q + 2ΓM R (P HQ)R = 0 .

(4.31)

Its planar variant ∇M S ĀB̄ = 0 is then automatically guaranteed if compatibility
with the generalized frame (4.26) is imposed.
The implications of the combined O(D, D) and generalized metric compatibilities is
better understood through the introduction of the following two projectors (3.85)
1
P̂M N = (ηM N − HM N ) ,
2

1
P̌M N = (ηM N + HM N ) ,
2

(4.32)

which satisfy the properties
P̂M Q P̂Q N = P̂M N ,

P̌M Q P̌Q N = P̌M N ,

P̂M N + P̌M N = δM N .

(4.33)

Compatibility with both metrics then equals compatibility with these projectors
∇M P̂N Q = 0 ,

∇M P̌N Q = 0 ,

(4.34)

P̌N R P̂S Q ΓM R S = P̂R Q ∂M P̌N R .

(4.35)

which in turn implies

Then, compatibility with the generalized metric and O(D, D) metric combined imply that only these projections of the connection are determined.
• Partial integration in the presence of the generalized density e−2d (3.66)
Z
Z
−2d
M
e U∇M V = − e−2d V M ∇M U
⇒
ΓP M P = −2∂M d .

(4.36)

Notice that if the generalized frame were compatible, this would imply in turn that
EC̄ N WN Ā C̄ = −FĀ .
37

(4.37)

This requirement can also be considered as compatibility with the measure e−2d ,
provided a trace part in the covariant derivative is added when acting on tensorial
densities.
• Vanishing torsion. The Riemannian definition of torsion (4.5) is tensorial with
respect to the Lie derivative, but not under generalized diffeomorphisms. In order
to define a covariant notion of torsion, one can mimic its definition in terms of the
Lie derivative, and replace it with the covariant derivative [24]
M
(L∇
= TP Q M ξ P V Q ,
ξ − Lξ )V

TP Q M = 2Γ[P Q]M + Y M Q R S ΓRP S .

(4.38)

This defines a covariant generalized torsion, which corrects the usual Riemannian
definition through the invariant Y defined in (3.31), which in turn corrects the
Lie derivative. Vanishing generalized torsion has the following consequence on the
Christoffel connection
2Γ[P Q]M + ΓM P Q = 0 .

(4.39)

If this is additionally supplemented with the O(D, D) metric compatibility (4.28),
one gets that the totally antisymmetric part of the Christoffel connection vanishes
Γ[M N P ] = 0

⇔

3W[ĀB̄ C̄] = FĀB̄ C̄ ,

(4.40)

where the implication assumes generalized frame compatibility.
• Connections determined in terms of physical degrees of freedom. Typically, under
the imposition of the above constraints on the connections, only some of their components get determined in terms of the physical fields. In [28], the connections were
further demanded to live in the kernel of some projectors, allowing for a full determination of the connection. The prize to pay is that under these projections the
derivative is “semi-covariant”, i.e. only some projections of it behave covariantly
under transformations.
As we reviewed in the previous section, compatibility with the O(D, D) metric is absent
in Riemannian geometry. There, metric compatibility and vanishing torsion determine
38

the connection completely, and moreover guarantee partial integration in the presence of
√
the measure g. Here, the measure contains a dilaton dependent part, and then one has
to demand in addition, compatibility with the generalized dilaton. An agreement between
Riemannian geometry and double geometry is that vanishing (generalized) torsion implies
that the projection of the spin connection to the space of fluxes is proportional to the
fluxes (4.15) and (4.40).
Despite the many coincidences between Riemannian and double geometry, there is a
striking difference. While in the former demanding metric compatibility and vanishing
torsion determines the connection completely, in double geometry these requirements turn
out to leave undetermined components of the connection. Only some projections of the
connections are determined, such as the trace (4.37) and its full antisymmetrization (4.40),
among others.
To highlight the differences and similarities between Riemannian and double geometry,
we list in Table (1) some of the quantities appearing in both frameworks.

4.3

Generalized curvature

In this section we will assume that the generalized Christoffel and spin connections satisfy
all the conditions listed in Table 1. We would now like to seek a generalized curvature.
The first natural guess would be to consider the conventional definition of Riemann tensor
(4.18) and extend it straightforwardly to the double space, namely
RM N P Q = 2∂[M ΓN ]P Q + 2Γ[M |R Q Γ|N ]P R .

(4.41)

However, this does not work because this expression is non-covariant under generalized
diffeomorphisms
∆ξ RM N P Q = 2∆ξ Γ[M N ] R ΓRP Q + strong constraint .

(4.42)

In Riemannian geometry, this would be proportional to the failure of the torsion to be
covariant, which is zero. Here however Γ[M N ] P is not the torsion, because as we have seen,
it is non-covariant. This in turn translates into the non-covariance of the Riemann tensor.
39

Riemannian geometry

Double geometry

Frame compatibility

W = Ω+Γ

W =Ω+Γ

O(D, D) compatibility

−−−−−−−

ΓM N P = −ΓM P N
WM ĀB̄ = −WM B̄ Ā

Metric compatibility

∂i gjk = 2Γi(j l gk)l

∂M HP Q = 2ΓM (P N HQ)N

Vanishing torsion

Γ[ij] k = 0

Γ[M N P ] = 0
W[ĀB̄ C̄] = 3FĀB̄C̄

Measure compatibility

W[āb̄] c̄ = 2fāb̄ c̄
√
Γki k = √1g ∂i g

Determined part

Covariance failure

ΓP M P = e2d ∂M e−2d

Wb̄ā b̄ = fb̄ā b̄

WB̄Ā B̄ = −FĀ

Totally fixed

Only some

Γij k = 21 g kl (∂i gjl + ∂j gil − ∂l gij )

projections

∆ξ Γij k = ∂i ∂j ξ k

∆ξ ΓM N P = 2∂M ∂[N ξP ]
+ ΩRN P ΩR M S ξ S

Table 1: A list of conditions is given for objects in Riemannian and double geometry, with
their corresponding implications on the connections. Every line assumes that the previous
ones hold.
As explained above, one has to resort to a generalized version of torsion (4.38)
TP Q M = 2Γ[P Q]M + Y M Q R S ΓRP S = 0 .

(4.43)

In addition, even if the first term in (4.42) were zero, we would have to deal with the
other terms taking the form of the strong constraint if we were not imposing it from the
beginning. For the moment, let us ignore them, and we will come back to them later.
Notice that vanishing torsion (4.43) implies
∆ξ RM N P Q = −∆ξ ΓRM N ΓR P Q + strong constraint ,

(4.44)

and then it is trivial to check that the following combination
RM N P Q = RM N P Q + RP QM N + ΓRM N ΓR P Q + strong constraint
40

(4.45)

is tensorial up to terms taking the form of the strong constraint:
∆ξ RM N P Q = strong constraint .

(4.46)

Taking the strong constraint-like terms into account, the full generalized Riemann
tensor is given by
RM N P Q = RM N P Q + RP QM N +

1 R SL
Y L (ΓRM N ΓSP Q − ΩRM N ΩSP Q ) ,
2D

(4.47)

and is now covariant up to the consistency constraints of the theory discussed in Section
3.5.
Since the connection has undetermined components, so does this generalized Riemann
tensor. This combination of connections and derivatives does not project the connections
to their determined part, so we are left with an undetermined Riemann tensor. The
projections of the Riemann tensor with the projectors (4.32) turn out to be either vanishing or unprojected as well. This situation marks a striking difference with Riemannian
geometry.
We can now wonder whether some traces (and further projections) of this generalized
Riemann tensor lead to sensible quantities, such as some generalized Ricci tensor related to
the equations of motion of DFT (3.81), or some generalized Ricci scalar related to (3.61).
For this to occur, the traces must necessarily project the connections in the Riemann
tensor in such a way that only their determined part survives.
Tracing the generalized Riemann tensor with the projector P̂ (4.32), one can define a
generalized notion of Ricci tensor
RM N = P̂ P Q RM P N Q ,

(4.48)

from which the action of DFT and its equations of motion can be obtained from traces
and projections. Taking another trace one recovers the (already defined) generalized Ricci
scalar
1
R = P̂ M N RM N
4

(4.49)

that defines the action of DFT (it actually gives this tensor up to terms that constitute
total derivatives when introduced in the action (3.60)). On the other hand, the following
41

projections of this new generalized Ricci tensor contain the information on the equations
of motion (3.81)
G[M N ] = P̂[M P P̌N ] Q RP Q = 0 .

(4.50)

It might be quite confusing that the projections of the generalized Ricci tensor yielding
the equations of motion correspond to the vanishing of an antisymmetric tensor. However,
there is a remarkable property of matrices of the form (4.50)
P̂M R P̌N S RRS = 0

⇒ P̂[M R P̌N ] S RRS = 0 ⇒ P̂Q M P̂[M R P̌N ] S RRS = 0

⇑

m

⇓

P̂Q M P̂(M R P̌N ) S RRS = 0 ⇐ P̂(M R P̌N ) S RRS = 0 ⇐

. (4.51)

P̂M R P̌N S RRS = 0

Therefore, the vanishing of the antisymmetric part of P̂M R P̌N S RRS contains the same
information as the vanishing of the symmetric part. Then, one can alternatively define
a symmetric generalized Ricci tensor whose vanishing yields the equations of motion as
well
b M N = P̂(M R P̌N ) S RRS = 0 .
R

(4.52)

We summarize some differences between the geometric quantities in Riemannian and
double geometry in Table (2).
Riemannian geometry

Double geometry

Torsion

Tij k = 2Γ[ij] k

TM N P = 2Γ[M N ] P + ΓP M N

Riemann tensor

Determined

Undetermined

Rijl k = 2∂[i Γj]l k

RM N P Q = RM N P Q + RP QM N

+2Γ[i|m k Γ|j]l m

+ΓRM N ΓR P Q − ΩRM N ΩR P Q

Ricci tensor

Determined

Undetermined

Rij = Rikj k

RM N = P̂P Q RM QN P

EOM

Rij = 0

P̂(M R P̌N ) S RRS = 0

Ricci Scalar

R = g ij Rij

R = 14 P̂ M N RM N

Table 2: A list of definitions of curvatures is given for Riemannian and double geometry.
42

An alternative to this approach was considered in [30], where only the Weitzenböck
connection is non-vanishing and the spin connection is set to zero. The Weitzenböck
connection is torsionful, and the torsion coincides with the generalized fluxes (3.57). This
connection is flat, and then the Riemann tensor vanishes, but the dynamics is encoded in
the torsion and one can still build the DFT action and equations of motion from it, by
demanding H-invariance (3.56). Since the connection and torsion are fully determined,
this approach has the advantage of the absence of unphysical degrees of freedom. This
also has a general relativity analog with its corresponding similarities and differences.

4.4

Generalized Bianchi identities

The generalized Riemann tensor satisfies the same symmetry properties as in Riemannian
geometry (4.20)
RM N P Q = R([M N ][P Q]) ,

(4.53)

3
R[ĀB̄C̄ D̄] = ZĀB̄ C̄ D̄ = ∂[Ā FB̄C̄ D̄] − F[ĀB̄ Ē FC̄ D̄]Ē ,
4

(4.54)

plus a set of Generalized BI

which under the strong constraint in the supergravity frame simply become the BI of
supergravity (3.18) and (4.20), as we will see later. Notice that due to the consistency
constraints (3.44) this vanishes as a in the usual Riemannian case
ZĀB̄ C̄ D̄ = ∆EĀ FB̄C̄ D̄ = ED̄M ∆Ā LEB̄ EC̄ M = 0 .
BI in DFT were extensively discussed in [29].

43

(4.55)

5

Dimensional reductions

In order to make contact with four-dimensional physics, we have to address the dimensional reduction of DFT. Strictly speaking, we were already assuming that some directions
were compact, but now make the distinction between compact and non-compact directions precise, and evaluate the dynamics around particular backgrounds. We begin this
section with a brief review of Scherk-Schwarz (SS) compactifications of supergravity [86],
and then extend these ideas to dimensionally reduce DFT to four dimensions, following
[66], [67]. We show that the resulting effective action corresponds to the electric bosonic
sector of half-maximal gauged supergravity [85] containing all duality orbits of electric
fluxes, including the non-geometric ones [68].

5.1

Scherk-Schwarz compactifications

Let us briefly recall how geometric fluxes emerge in SS compactifications of supergravity,
along the lines of [87].
Consider the NS-NS sector of supergravity containing a D-dimensional metric gij =
ei ā sāb̄ ej b̄ , a two-form field bij and a dilaton φ, all depending on D space-time coordinates
xi (we are thinking of D = 10). We will refer to the D−dimensional theory as the
parent theory. When dimensionally reduced to d = D − n dimensions, the resulting lower
dimensional theory will be referred to as the effective theory.
SS reductions can be introduced as the following set of steps to be performed in order
to obtain the effective theory:
• Split coordinates

xi = (xµ , y m) .

(5.1)

The coordinates y m , m = 1, . . . , n correspond to the compact space directions, while
xµ , µ = 1, . . . , d are the space-time directions of the effective theory. The former
(latter) are called internal (external).
• Split indices in fields and parameters. The original D-dimensional theory enjoys
44

a set of symmetries and the fields belong to representations of these symmetries.
Upon compactification, the parent symmetry groups will be broken to those of the
effective theory. The fields must then be decomposed into the representations of the
symmetry group in the lower dimensional theory


p
q
p
gµν + gpq A µ A ν A µ gpn
,
gij = 
gmp Ap ν
gmn
bij =



b − 1 (Ap µ Vpν − Ap ν Vpµ ) + Ap µ Aq ν bpq
 µν 2
−Vmν + bmp Ap ν

(5.2)

p

Vnµ − bnp A µ
bmn



,

(5.3)

i.e. into internal, external and mixed components. Notice that here there is an
abuse of notation in that gµν are not the µν components of gij .
Also the parameters of gauge transformations must be split
λi = (ǫµ , Λm ) ,

λ̃i = (ǫµ , Λm ) .

(5.4)

• Provide a reduction ansatz. The particular dependence of the fields on the external
and internal coordinates is of the form
gµν = b
gµν (x) ,

ba µ (x) ,
Am µ = ua m (y)A

gmn = ua m (y)ubn (y)b
gab (x) ,

bµν = bbµν (x) ,

(5.5)

Vmµ = ua m (y)Vbaµ (x) ,

bmn = ua m (y)ubn (y)bbab (x) + vmn (y) ,

b
and similarly for the dilaton φ = φ(x).
The procedure even tells you what form this
ansatz should have. If there is a global symmetry in the theory, such as a shift in

the two-form b → b + v, then one simply “gauges” the global symmetry by making
it depend on the internal coordinates v → v(y). The y-dependent elements u(y)
and v(y) are called twists. Once the procedure is over, the dependence on internal
coordinates will disappear, but the information on the twists will remain in the
form of structure-like constants that will parameterize the possible deformations of
the effective action. For this reason, the twist matrices are taken to be constant
in the external directions, because otherwise Lorentz invariance would be explicitly
45

broken by these constants in the effective action. The hatted fields on the other
hand depend only on the external coordinates, and will therefore correspond to the
dynamical degrees of freedom in the effective action. These are a d-dimensional
ba µ , Vbaµ ), plus n2 + 1 scalars
metric b
gµν and a two-form bbµν , plus 2n vectors (A
b
(b
gab , bbab , φ).

The gauge parameters must be twisted as well


b a (x) ,
λi = b
ǫµ (x), ua m (y)Λ



b a (x) .
λ̃i = b
ǫµ (x), um a (y)Λ

(5.6)

• Identify residual gauge transformations. The gauge transformations of the parent
supergravity theory are given by Lie derivatives (3.14)
Lλ V i = λj ∂j V i − V j ∂j λi ,

(5.7)

plus gauge transformations of the two-form (3.16). Plugging the fields and gauge
parameters with the SS form into these, one obtains the resulting gauge transformations of the effective theory. For example, taking V i = (b
v µ (x), ua m (y)b
v a(x)), one
gets
bbǫ b
Lλ V µ = b
ǫν ∂ν vbµ − vbν ∂ν b
ǫµ ≡ L
vµ ,

(5.8)

bb Vb a ,
Lλ V m = ua m L
λ

(5.9)

bb Vb a = Lb Vb a + fbc a Λ
b b vbc ,
L
λ
λ

(5.10)

fab c = ua m ∂m ub n uc n − ub m ∂m ua n uc n ,

(5.11)

and then the d-dimensional Lie derivative of the effective action is obtained. Similarly,

where the resulting transformation is gauged

since it receives the contribution from the following combination of twist matrices

which takes the same form as the SS flux (4.15). Even if these objects are defined
in terms of the twist ua m , which is y-dependent, given that they appear in the
residual transformations and we look for a y-independent theory, one must impose
46

the constraint that they are constant. In the literature, these constants are known as
metric fluxes, since they correspond to the background fluxes of the metric (notice
that the twist ua m (y) corresponds to the internal coordinate dependence of the
metric (5.5)).
Pursuing this procedure with all the components of all the gauge transformations,
we find the gauge transformations for all the fields in the effective action. To render
the result readable, let us rearrange things in a compact language. The gauge
parameters are taken to be of the form
b A) ,
ξb = (b
ǫµ , b
ǫµ , Λ

and similarly the vector fields

ba , b
b A = (λ
Λ
λa ) ,

bA µ = (Vbaµ , A
ba µ )
A

and the scalars
cAB
M



gbab

−b
g acbbcb

(5.12)

(5.13)


.
= 
cb
cdb
bbac b
b
g
gab − bac b
b
g bdb

(5.14)

Then, the different gauge transformations, parameterized by the different components of ξb are inherited from the parent gauge transformations, and take the form
δξb b
gµν = Lbǫ b
gµν ,

(5.15)

δξb bbµν = Lbǫ bbµν + (∂µb
ǫν − ∂ν b
ǫµ ) ,

bA µ = Lbǫ A
bA µ − ∂µ Λ
b A + fBC A Λ
bBA
bC µ ,
δξb A

cAB = Lbǫ M
cAB + fAC D Λ
bC M
cDB + fBC D Λ
bC M
cAD .
δξb M

(5.16)
(5.17)
(5.18)

b b
Hence, we can readily identify the role of the different components of ξ:
ǫµ are the

diffeomorphism parameters, b
ǫµ generate gauge transformations of the two-form, and
b A the parameters of the gauge transformations for vectors. While here we have
Λ

made a great effort to unify all these transformations, in DFT this unification is
there from the beginning, as we will see later.

47

Here, we have introduced the “gaugings” or “fluxes” fAB C , which have the following
non-vanishing components
fabc = 3(∂[a vbc] + f[ab d vc]d ) ,
fab c = ua m ∂m ub n uc n − ub m ∂m ua n uc n ,

(5.19)

while the rest of them vanish
fa bc = 0 ,

f abc = 0 .

(5.20)

This compact way of writing the results assumes that indices are raised and lowered
with an O(n, n) metric



ηAB = 

a

0

δ b

δa b

0



.

(5.21)

When written in the form fABC = fAB D ηDC they are totally antisymmetric fABC =
f[ABC] .
• Obtain the d-dimensional effective action. When the SS ansatz is plugged in the
supergravity action, the result is

Z
p
b
−2φ
b µ φb − 1 M
cAB F Aµν F B µν
R + 4 ∂ µ φ∂
ge
S =
dx b
4

1
1
cAB D µ M
cAB + V
−
Gµνρ G µνρ + Dµ M
12
8

(5.22)


.

Here R is the d-dimensional Ricci scalar, and we have defined the field strengths as
bA ν − ∂ν A
bA µ − fBC A A
bB µ A
bC ν ,
F A µν = ∂µ A

bA µ A
bB ρ A
bC λ + 3∂[µ A
bA ρ A
bλ]A ,
Gµρλ = 3∂[µbbρλ] − fABC A

(5.23)

cAB = ∂µ M
cAB − fAD C A
bD µ M
cCB − fBD C A
bD µ M
cAC .
Dµ M

(5.24)

and a covariant derivative for scalars as

Also, due to the gaugings, a scalar potential arose
V =−

1
cAB − 1 fAC E fBD F M
cAB M
cCD M
cEF − 1 fABC f ABC ,
fDA C fCB D M
4
12
6
(5.25)
48

which strongly resembles the form of the DFT action (3.61). Let us mention that we
have actually considered a simplified ansatz. Lorentz invariance is also preserved if a
warp factor is included in the reductions ansatz, which would turn on additional flux
backgrounds of the form fA , in which case the effective action would exactly coincide
with the DFT action.
This concludes the introduction to the basic notions of SS compactifications of supergravity. We should say that there exist different related Scherk-Schwarz compactifications,
and their distinction goes beyond the scope of this review. Also, the consistency of these
reductions is subtle and by no means automatic, and we refer to the literature for detailed
discussions on these points (see for example [8, 88]).

5.2

Geometric fluxes

In the SS reduction defined in (5.5), we restricted to the zero modes and truncated all
the states of the infinite tower of Kaluza-Klein (KK) modes. Had we conserved them, the
effective action would have been more involved and would have had towers of KK degrees
of freedom. Typically, these modes are neglected because their masses scale proportionally
to the order of each mode. If they were kept, other stringy states with comparable masses
should be kept as well, and the effective theory would have to be completed with the
corresponding contributions.
This can be more clearly seen in a toroidal compactification. Indeed, notice that
a compactification on a torus with vanishing background of the two-form corresponds
a
to taking ua m = δm
and vab = 0 in the SS procedure. In this case, (5.19) would give

fABC = 0, i.e. we get an ungauged theory. Recalling the mass spectrum of closed strings
on tori (3.1) and the fact that the winding modes decouple in the field theory limit, we
see that the zero mode of such a compactification is massless for the fields considered
in supergravity (with N = Ñ = 1). Had we kept states with p 6= 0, to be consistent
we should have also taken into account other string excitations with comparable masses.
Since all the fluxes vanish in this case, no masses can be generated in the effective theory.
These compactifications on tori with vanishing form fluxes (i.e., configurations with
49

fABC = 0) present many phenomenological problems:
• The scalar potential vanishes, so any configuration of scalars corresponds to a possible minimum of the theory. The moduli space is then fully degenerate, and all
scalars are massless. This poses a problem because, on the one hand, there are no
massless scalars in nature, and on the other hand, the theory loses all predictability
since one has the freedom to choose any vacuum of the effective theory.
• Since the scalar potential vanishes, there is no way to generate a cosmological constant in the lower-dimensional theory. This is contrary to experimental evidence,
which indicates that our universe has a tiny positive cosmological constant, i.e. it
is a de Sitter (dS) universe.
• The gravitinos of the supersymmetric completion of the theory are massless as well.
If we start with an N = 1 theory in D = 10, we would end with an N = 4 theory
in d = 4. This is too much supersymmetry and we have no possibility to break it.
• Since the fluxes play the role of structure constants, their vanishing implies that
the gauge symmetries are abelian. Then, Standard-Model like interactions are not
possible.
It is then clear that a torus compactification is not interesting from a phenomenological
point of view. The situation changes when the twists ua m (y) and vab (y) are such that
fABC 6= 0. We have seen that they allow to turn on metric fluxes fab c (through ua m ) and
two-form fluxes fabc (through vab ) in (5.19). The appearance of these fluxes now generates
a scalar potential (5.25) that classically lifts the moduli space. This in turn generates
masses for scalars and gravitinos, renders the gauge symmetries non-abelian and allows
for the possibility of a cosmological constant. However, although the phenomenological
perspectives improved, it turns out that geometric fluxes seem not to be enough for moduli
stabilization and dS vacua, and then one has to go beyond them. There are a number of
no-go theorems and evidence [89] pointing in this direction.

50

In the literature, the two-form and metric fluxes both go under the name of geometric
fluxes, and are denoted
Habc ≡ fabc = 3(∂[a vbc] + f[ab d vc]d ) ,

(5.26)

ωab c ≡ fab c = ua m ∂m ubn uc n − ub m ∂m ua n uc n
respectively. Since T-dualities exchange metric and two-form components (3.11), they
exchange these fluxes as well
h(c)

Habc ←→ ωab c .

(5.27)

Let us now devote a few lines to give an interpretation of the SS procedure in terms
of a compactification. The SS ansatz (5.5) can be interpreted as follows. The twists
ua m (y) correspond to the metric background in the compact space, and b
gab amount to
perturbations. The full internal metric reads

gmn = ua m (y)b
gab (x)ub n (y) .

(5.28)

When plugging this in the supergravity action, one obtains an effective theory for the
perturbations b
gmn , that is deformed by parameters that only depend on the background.
Then, freezing the perturbations as
gab (x) = δab
b

gmn = ua m (y)δab ub n (y) ,

⇒

(5.29)

gives the background on which one is compactifying, and the effective action dictates
the dynamics of the perturbations around the background. Similarly, the perturbations
of the two-form are given by bbab , and freezing them gives the corresponding two-form
background

bbab (x) = 0

⇒

bmn = vmn (y) .

(5.30)

The twist matrices ua m and vmn can then be interpreted as the backgrounds associated
to the vielbein and the two-form of the compact space. From now on, when referring to
backgrounds we shall assume that the perturbations are frozen.
Let us now explore a very simple setting that gives rise to a flux for the two-form, Habc
(later, we will consider all its T-duals). This is the canonical example in the literature on
51

(non-)geometric fluxes, and it is nicely discussed in [7]. Most of the terminology related
to (non-)geometric fluxes is taken from this example, so we find it instructive to revisit
it here. For simplicity, we consider a three-dimensional internal space, which can be
embedded in the full internal six-dimensional space. Consider a compactification on a
three-torus with a non-trivial two-form
gmn = δmn ,

b23 = Ny 1

a
um a = δm
,

⇔

v23 = Ny 1 .

(5.31)

Plugging this in (5.26), we obtain
H123 = N ,

ω12 3 = ω23 1 = ω31 2 = 0 ,

(5.32)

so a compactification on a torus with a non-trivial two-form field turns on a H-flux in the
effective action.
Since this background has isometries in the directions y 2 , y 3, we can perform a Tduality in one of these directions, lets say h(3) , through the Buscher rules (3.11). Then,
we obtain the background
ds2 = gmn dy mdy n = (dy 1 )2 + (dy 2)2 + (dy 3 + Ny 1 dy 2)2 ,
This corresponds to





1 0 0




a
u m =  0 1 0 ,


1
0 Ny 1

vmn = 0 .

bmn = 0 .

(5.33)

(5.34)

Plugging this in (5.26), we find that the fluxes turned on in the effective action are now
H123 = ω23 1 = ω31 2 = 0 ,

ω12 3 = N ,

(5.35)

in agreement with the T-duality chain (5.27). The background (5.33) is called twisted
torus, and it generates metric fluxes ωab c upon compactifications. In more general backgrounds, SS compactifications allow to turn on form and metric fluxes simultaneously,
provided the compactification is done on a twisted torus with a non-trivial two-form
background. Examples of different Scherk-Schwarz compactifications in different scenarios, and their relation to gauged supergravity can be found in [90].
52

5.3

Gauged supergravities and duality orbits

The effective action (5.22), obtained by means of a SS compactification, is a particular
gauged supergravity. For a review of gauged supergravity see [8]. These kind of dimensional reductions preserves all the supersymmetry of the parent theory, and are therefore
highly constrained. When the starting point is D = 10 supergravity with N = 1 supersymmetries (16 supercharges), the d = 4 effective theory preserves all the supercharges
and has therefore N = 4 supersymmetries. This corresponds to half the maximal allowed
supersymmetries, and so they are called half-maximal gauged supergravities. These theories have been widely studied irrespectively of their stringy higher dimensional origin,
and the full set of possible deformations have been classified in [85]. Let us here review
the basics of the bosonic sector of d = 4 half-maximal gauged supergravity, so that we
can then identify particular gaugings as specific reductions in different backgrounds.
The bosonic field content of half-maximal gauged supergravity in four dimensions
bA µ and 38 scalars, arranged in two objects:
consists of a metric b
gµν , 12 vector fields A
b0 and a scalar matrix M
cAB with 36 independent
a complex parameter τ = e−2φ + iB
b

components parameterizing the coset O(6, 6)/O(6) × O(6).

There is an additional freedom to couple an arbitrary number N of vector multiplets
but, for simplicity, we will not consider this possibility (otherwise the global symmetry
group would have to be extended to O(D, D + N) [66]). Also, the global symmetry
group contains an SL(2) factor as well, related to S-duality, which mixes electric and
magnetic sectors. This is not captured by DFT (unless the global symmetry group is
further extended to include S-duality) and then one can only obtain the electric sector.
The ungauged theory is invariant under an O(6, 6) global symmetry group, and by
“ungauged” we mean that the gauge group is the Abelian U(1)12 . This group can however
be rendered non-Abelian by gauging a subgroup of O(6, 6). Given the O(6, 6) generators
(tα )A B , with α = 1, . . . , 66; A = 1, . . . , 12, there is a powerful object named embedding
tensor ΘA α that dictates the possible gaugings of the theory. The gauge group generators
are given by ΘA α (tα )B C , so ΘA α establishes how the gauge group is embedded in the global
symmetry group. The 12 ⊗ 66 components of ΘA α are restricted by a linear constraint
53

that leaves only 12 + 220 components, parameterized by
ξA ,

fABC = f[ABC] ,

(5.36)

and these are further restricted by quadratic constraints
ξA ξ A = 0 ,

(5.37)

ξ C fABC = 0

(5.38)

fE[AB f E CD] =

1
f[ABC ξD] ,
3

(5.39)

necessary for gauge invariance of the embedding tensor (and closure of the algebra). The
O(6, 6) indices are raised and lowered with the invariant metric (5.21).
b0 → bbµν ,
In four dimensions, two-forms are dual to scalars. Dualizing the scalar B

the action of the electric bosonic sector of half-maximal gauged supergravity then takes

the form (5.22) when ξA = 0. We then see that the SS compactification of D = 10
supergravity on a twisted torus with two-form flux leads to a particular half-maximal
gauged supergravity in d = 4. The only possible deformations in that theory are given
by (5.26). From now on we will restrict to the gaugings fABC and set the rest of them to
zero, i.e. ξA = 0, for simplicity.
The global symmetries of the ungauged theory amount to O(6, 6) transformations
bA µ → hB A A
bB µ ,
A

cAB → hA C M
cCD hB D ,
M

(5.40)

where the elements h ∈ O(6, 6) were introduced in Section 3.1. When the gaugings are
turned on, the global symmetry group is broken by them. However, O(6, 6) transformations do not change the physics. In fact, given a configuration of gaugings fABC with
their corresponding action (5.22), any O(6, 6) rotation of them,
fABC → hA D hB E hC F fDEF ,

(5.41)

would yield a different configuration with a corresponding different action. However,
through a field redefinition of the form (5.40), this action can be taken to the original
form. In other words, we have the relation
h
i
h
i
D
E
F
A
A bB
C c
D
b
c
S hA hB hC fDEF , A µ , MAB = S fABC , hB A µ , hA MCD hB
,
54

(5.42)

and so an O(6, 6) transformation of the gaugings just amounts to a field redefinition.
Then, it corresponds to the same theory. For this reason, it is not convenient to talk
about configurations of gaugings, but rather of orbits of gaugings. An orbit is a set of
configurations related by duality transformations, so that different theories correspond to
different duality orbits of gaugings.
An intriguing feature of gauged supergravities is that they admit more deformations
than those that can be reached by means of geometric compactifications on twisted tori
with two-form flux. In fact, for generic configurations, the embedding tensor has components
Qa bc = fa bc ,

Rabc = f abc ,

(5.43)

that cannot be turned on through the canonical SS compactification (5.20). Since the
other set of gaugings fabc , f a bc were identified with the geometrical fluxes, these are said
to be non-geometric gaugings. Here we have named them Q and R to match the standard
parlance in the literature of flux compactifications. One then wonders to what kind of
backgrounds or compactifications these gaugings would correspond to. As we will see,
T-duality has a very concrete answer to this question.
Before moving to a discussion on non-geometric fluxes, let us briefly review the arguments of [60, 62] to invoke non-geometric fluxes from a string theory perspective. In
[60, 62], all supergravities in D = 10 and 11 dimensions are compactified in a geometric
sense to four dimensions. These higher dimensional supergravities are the low energy limit
of duality related string theories, like for instance Type IIA and Type IIB strings. Each
compactification gives rise to a fluxed effective action containing only geometric fluxes.
When duality transformations are applied at the level of the four dimensional effective
action, one finds that, although the parent theories are connected by dualities, the effective
theories are not [60, 62]. Thus, new non-geometric fluxes have to be invoked so that
the theories match. In this process, gaugings (or fluxes) that look geometric in one
picture (duality frame), are non-geometric in others, and all of them should be included
in string compactifications in order to preserve all the stringy information at the level of the
effective action. Moreover, when all the gaugings are considered together in the effective
55

action, the resulting (super-)potential includes all the possible deformations (gaugings) of
gauged supergravity. All the T-dual deformations are captured by generalized geometric
compactifications of DFT, as we will see.
We have seen in Section 5.2 that starting with a toroidal background with a two-form
flux H123 (5.31), a h(3) T-duality can be performed in the direction y 3 leading to a twisted
torus with metric flux ω12 3 (5.33). The latter still has an isometry in the direction y 2, so
nothing prevents us from doing a new T-duality, namely h(2) . At the level of fluxes, the
chain would go as
h(c)

h(b)

Habc ←→ ωab c ←→ Qa bc ,

(5.44)

and so a compactification on the resulting background would turn on a Q1 23 flux in the
effective action. Instead of using the Buscher rules, we find it more instructive to Tdualize via the construction of a generalized metric. For the twisted torus (5.33) it takes
the form


g mn
HM N = 
bmp g pn

0
0
0
0
0 
1
0
1
−N
y
0
0
0
−g mp bpn
1 1+(N y 1 )2 0


0
−N
y
0
0
 = 0 0
0
1
0
0  .
0
0
0
0 1+(N y 1 )2 N y 1
gmn − bmp g pq bqn
0
0
0
0
N y1
1

1



Now acting on this twisted torus background with a T-duality in the direction y 2
1 0 0 0 0 0!
HM N → h(2) M P h(2) N Q HP Q ,

we get

h(2) =

0 0 0 0 1 0
0 0 1 0 0 0
0 0 0 1 0 0
0 1 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 1

,

(5.45)

0
0
0
0
0 
0 1+(N y 1 )2
0
0
0
N y1

0
1+(N y 1 )2 0 −N y 1 0 
h(2) M P h(2) N Q HP Q =  00
0
0
1
0
0  ,
0
0
−N y 1 0
1
0
0
N y1
0
0
0
1

(5.46)

1

and from here we can obtain the background metric
ds2 = gmn dy mdy n = (dy 1)2 +

1
[(dy 2)2 + (dy 3)2 ]
1 + (Ny 1 )2

(5.47)

and the two-form
b23 = −

Ny 1
1 + (Ny 1 )2

(5.48)

associated to the Q1 23 flux. This background only depends on y 1 in the directions orthogonal to y 1, so this corresponds to a base coordinate. When undergoing a monodromy
56

y 1 → y 1 + 1, the solution does not come back to itself, but rather to an O(2, 2) ∈ O(3, 3)
rotation of it. Since this duality element mixes the metric and the two-form in a nontrivial way, it is called a T-fold [14]. From a supergravity point of view, these backgrounds
are globally ill-defined because the T-duality element needed to “glue” the two different
coordinate patches is not an element of the geometric (i.e. diffeos + shifts (3.10)) subgroup of O(3, 3). This background is then said to correspond to a globally non-geometric
flux Qa bc . Notice however that from the double-space point of view there is no such global
issue provided one allows transitions with the full O(3, 3) symmetry group (including
T-dualities (3.10)). In this case, the identifications between the coordinates under monodromies involve the dual ones, and the generalized bein is globally well defined on the
double space.
If we intended to do a further T-duality [60], say in the direction y 1,
h(c)

h(b)

h(a)

Habc ←→ ωab c ←→ Qa bc ←→ Rabc ,

(5.49)

we would face the problem that we ran out of isometries. Therefore the resulting background would have to depend on a “dual” coordinate and we would lose any notion of
locality in terms of the usual coordinates on which supergravity is defined. For this reason, the fluxes Rabc are usually named locally non-geometric. Clearly, again, this form of
non-geometry is not a problem in the double space either.
Notice that the chain (5.49) connects different configurations of gaugings via T-duality.
By definition, they all correspond to the same orbit, so the four dimensional theory really
does not distinguish between compactifications on tori with two-form flux, twisted tori
or T-folds, that are connected by T-dualities. In this sense, the orbit itself is basically
geometric: if we were given an action with a single flux, either H, ω, Q or R, we would
always find a geometric uplift and face its corresponding phenomenological problems. A
different situation would be that of an action containing both geometric and non-geometric
fluxes simultaneously turned on. T-duality would exchange geometric with non-geometric
fluxes, and it would never be able to get rid of the non-geometric ones. This kind of
configurations are said to belong to a duality orbit of non-geometric fluxes [68], and they
cannot be reached by means of a standard SS compactification of supergravity. They
57

are actually the most interesting orbits since they circumvent all the no-go theorems
preventing moduli fixing, dS vacua, etc. [89].
As we will see, being T-duality invariant and defined on a double space, DFT is free
from global and local issues. Generalized SS compactifications of DFT will be the topic of
the forthcoming subsections. We will see that DFT provides a beautiful geometric uplift
of all duality orbits, including the non-geometric ones. We anticipate the final picture in
Figure 5.3.

O(D,D)

Supergravity D-dim

❴ ❴ ❴ ❴ ❴ ❴ ❴/

DFT

Generalized SS

Geometric SS


Gauged supergravity
d-dim (geometric fluxes)



/o /o /o /o /o /o /o /o /o /
O(n,n)

Gauged supergravity
d-dim (all fluxes)

Figure 1: We picture the logic of DFT compactifications [66]. While standard SS reductions from supergravity in D = d + n dimensions (solid line) give rise to gauged
supergravity involving only geometric fluxes in d dimensions, invoking duality arguments
at the level of the effective action one can conjecture the need for dual fluxes [60, 62] to
complete all the deformations of gauged supergravity (waved line). More fundamentally,
DFT is the O(D, D)-covariantization of supergravity (dashed line), and generalized SS
compactifications of DFT give rise to gauged supergravities with all possible deformations
(dotted line).

5.4

Generalized Scherk-Schwarz compactifications

Here we generalize the SS procedure in a duality covariant way by applying it to DFT.
This and the following sections are mostly based on [66, 67, 34]. Let us then follow the
58

steps introduced in Section 5.1, although in a different order for convenience.
• In the double space we have coordinates X M = (x̃i , xi ), so we split them as follows
x̃i = (x̃µ , ỹm ) and xi = (xµ , y m). As before, m = 1, . . . , n are indices denoting

internal directions and µ = 1, . . . , d are space-time indices. Then, we have a double
external space and a double internal one with coordinates X = (x̃µ , xµ ) and YA =
(ỹm , y m ), respectively.
• Next we propose a reduction ansatz for the fields and gauge parameters in the theory,
inspired in the global symmetries of DFT. For the generalized bein and dilaton we
have
b
d(X) = d(X)
+ λ(Y) ,

bĀ I (X) U I M (Y) ,
E Ā M (X) = E

and for the gauge parameters we have

ξ M (X) = ξbI (X) UI M (Y) .

(5.50)

(5.51)

Here M, N = 1, . . . , 2D are curved indices in the parent theory and I, J = 1, . . . , 2D
are curved indices in the effective theory. Again we use the notation that hatted
objects are X-dependent, and all the (double) internal Y-dependence enters through
the twists UI M ∈ O(n, n) and λ.
• We plug this ansatz in the generalized fluxes, and get
bC̄ K ,
bB̄ J E
bĀ I E
FĀB̄ C̄ = FbĀB̄C̄ + fIJK E
bĀ I ,
FĀ = FbĀ + fI E

(5.52)
(5.53)

where we have split the coordinate dependence in X-dependent quantities
b [ĀB̄C̄] ,
FbĀB̄ C̄ = 3Ω

bĀ I ∂I db,
b B̄ B̄ Ā + 2E
FbĀ = Ω

bC̄J ,
bB̄ J E
bĀ I ∂I E
b ĀB̄C̄ = E
Ω

(5.55)

Ω̃IJK = UI M ∂M UJ N UKN ,

(5.56)

(5.54)

and Y-dependent ones

fIJK = 3Ω̃[IJK] ,
59

fI = Ω̃J JI + 2UI M ∂M λ .

(5.57)

This splitting is possible provided one imposes the following constraint on the duality
twist UI M
UI M ∂M b
g = ∂I b
g,

∂ M UI N ∂M b
g=0

(5.58)

This restriction on the duality twist, implies that it must be trivial in the Xdirections. There is a very important physical reason for this constraint to hold.
The quantities fIJK and fI are named gaugings, and we take them to be constant
fIJK = constant ,

fI = constant .

(5.59)

This is due to the fact that they appear in the action through the generalized fluxes
FĀB̄C̄ and FĀ , and since we look for a Y-independent effective Lagrangian, they
must be Y-independent because their dependence comes only through the gaugings,
which were requested to be constant. This in turn implies that the internal space
is paralellizable, namely, the twist must be globally defined. The constraint (5.58)
can be recast as
fIJ K ∂K b
g=0,

f I ∂I b
g = 0.

(5.60)

Its effect is to protect Lorentz invariance in the reduced theory. Notice that ∂I gb
is only non-vanishing in the external directions, and then if the gaugings had legs
in these directions they would explicitly break Lorentz symmetry. Therefore, fIJK

and fI can only be non-vanishing along the double internal space. For simplicity
here we will only analyze the case fI = 0, since consistency of the theory would
otherwise require a slightly modified reduction ansatz. A discussion on how to turn
the gaugings on in the usual supergravity picture can be found in [91], and in a
duality covariant way in DFT in [67].
• We next plug (5.52) and (5.53) into the action of DFT (3.60) to obtain the effective
theory
SGDF T = v

Z



−2db

dXe




1 b L
K
K
L
b IJ
− FIK + fIK
FbJL + fJL H
4
60

(5.61)




1 b K
G
G
K
b IL H
b JH H
bKG
−
FbLH + fLH H
FIJ + fIJ
12


 


1 b
IJ
IJ
IJK
IJK
b
b
b
b
FI FJ .
+ H −η
F
+f
− FIJK + fIJK
6

The internal coordinate dependence factorized, and it just amounts to an overall
constant factor
v=

Z

dYe−2λ .

(5.62)

If the gaugings vanished fIJK = 0, one recovers the usual DFT action (3.60) in
less dimensions. This then corresponds to a gauged DFT (GDFT) [21, 34] (see [71]
for a geometric and supersymmetric treatment of GDFT), which has been obtained
through a generalized SS compactification of a higher dimensional parent DFT.
• The symmetries of the GDFT are inherited from those of the parent DFT. For
instance, the generalized Lie derivative induces the gauge transformations in the
effective action

namely

Lξ V M = UI M LbξbVb I ,

(5.63)

LbξbVb I = LξbVb I − f I JK ξbJ Vb K .

(5.64)

The first term is the usual generalized Lie derivative, and the second one amounts
to a deformation due to the gaugings. These induced transformations now close (in
the sense of (3.46)) when the following quadratic constraints are imposed on the
gaugings
fH[IJ fKL] H = 0 ,

(5.65)

and the strong constraint holds in the external space
c=0
∂I Vb ∂ I W

(5.66)

for any hatted quantity, such as effective fields or gauged parameters. The action
of GDFT (5.61) is invariant under (5.64) up to these constraints. Moreover, it can
be checked that compactifying the constraints of the parent DFT gives the same
result that one would obtain by directly computing the consistency conditions of the
effective GDFT. These amount to even more relaxed versions of (5.65) and (5.66).
61

5.5

From gauged DFT to gauged supergravity

Now that we have built a covariant formulation of the effective theory, we can choose to
solve the effective strong constraint (5.66) in the usual frame of a gauged supergravity
c = 0 → ∂˜µ Vb = 0, i.e. we solve the strong constraint in the effective action
∂I Vb ∂ I W

by demanding that the effective fields and gauged parameters only depend on xµ . Due
to the coordinate splitting X → X, Y a convenient re-parameterization of the effective

b IJ is in order. The O(D, D) group is now broken to O(d, d)×O(n, n),
generalized metric H

and then it is convenient to rotate the group metric to the form


µ
δ ν



 ν
ηIJ = δµ
,


ηAB

(5.67)

where ηAB was defined in (5.21). This amounts to a re-parameterization of the generalized
bein



µ

e
b
 ā

bĀ I =  0
E

0

ρ

−b
eā b
cρµ
ebā µ

bB µ
b Ā B A
Φ

bAρ
−b
eā ρ A
0

b Ā A
Φ





,


(5.68)

which is now associated to the following generalized metric


bAρ
g µν
b
−b
g µρb
cρν
−b
g µρ A




νρ
C
D
ρσ
C
ρσ
b
b
c
b
c
b
b
HIJ =  −b
g b
cρµ b
gµν + A µ MCD A ν + b
cρµ b
g b
cσν MAC A µ + AAρ b
g b
cσµ  . (5.69)


bBρ
cBC A
bC ν + A
bBρ b
cAB + A
bAρ b
bBσ
−b
g νρ A
M
g ρσ b
cσν
M
g ρσ A
bB µ A
bBν . Also, A
bA µ are the vectors
Here we have introduced the combination b
cµν = bbµν + 12 A

cAB defined in (5.14). Notice
b Ā A is the scalar bein for the scalar metric M
(5.13) and Φ

that we have run out of indices, so we are denoting with the same letter Ā the full flat
index, and the internal one, the distinction should be clear from the context. Also due to
the splitting, now the gaugings are only non-vanishing in the internal components

f
(I, J, K) = (A, B, C)
ABC
fIJK =
.
(5.70)
 0
otherwise
Then, plugging (5.68) and (5.70) into (5.54), and taking into account that the indices

are now raised and lowered with (5.67), we can readily identify some of the components
62

of the compactified generalized fluxes with covariant quantities in the effective action
(5.23)-(5.24), namely
ec̄ ρ Gµνρ ,
Fāb̄c̄ = ebā µ ebb̄ ν b

b C̄ C F C µν ,
Fāb̄ C̄ = ebā µ ebb̄ ν Φ

where

(5.71)
(5.72)

b B̄ C ,
b C̄ C Dµ Φ
FāB̄ C̄ = ebā µ Φ

(5.73)

bµ A Φ
b B̄ B
b B̄ C − fAB C A
b B̄ C = ∂µ Φ
Dµ Φ

(5.74)

is the covariant derivative of the scalar bein. Finally, plugging (5.68) and (5.70) in the
action (5.61) of GDFT, one recovers the effective action of gauged supergravity (5.22).
Therefore, gauged supergravities are particular examples of GDFT.

5.6

Duality orbits of non-geometric fluxes

Even if it looks like the generalized SS procedure discussed in Sections 5.4 and 5.5 leads
to the same action (5.22) obtained from the usual geometric SS compactification of Section 5.1, this is not correct. The difference resides in the gaugings. While the geometric
SS reduction only allows to turn on the fluxes (5.19) and the others (5.20) vanish, the
generalized SS reduction of DFT allows, in principle, to turn on all the gaugings simultaneously.
We have defined the gaugings or fluxes in (5.56) in terms of a duality valued twist
matrix U(Y) ∈ O(n, n). This generalizes the usual SS gaugings in two ways:
• Global extension. The geometric SS gaugings are generated through ua m and vmn
in (5.19), which respectively correspond to the metric and two-form background.
They can both be combined into the O(n, n) duality twist matrix in the form


n
m
v
u
u
a nm
a
.
U AM = 
(5.75)
a
0
u m
A T-duality transformation would break the triangular form of this matrix, into

a new element of O(n, n) containing a South-West component. Therefore, the
63

only backgrounds that are allowed in the usual SS compactification of supergravity are those that come back to themselves under monodromies, up to u and/or
v-transformations only, i.e. the geometric subgroup of the full O(n, n). In a generalized SS compactification, we now allow the duality twist to be a generic element of
O(n, n). This includes, in addition to the elements ua m and v[mn] , a new component
usually dubbed β [mn]


ua m

ua n vnm



.
U AM = 
a
nm
a
a
np
u nβ
u m + u n β vpm

(5.76)

The effect of this extension is now to allow for backgrounds that come back to
themselves under monodromies, up to a generic O(n, n) transformation. This is
the case of the T-folds discussed before. Then, the generalized SS compactification
allows for new backgrounds that are globally ill defined from the usual (geometric)
supergravity point of view.
• Local extension. The fluxes (5.56) are now not only defined in terms of an extended
duality twist, but also in terms of a generalized derivative with respect to all coordinates. This would allow for more richness in the space of gaugings, if the duality
twist violated the strong constraint. In this case, the dual coordinate dependence
would make no sense from a supergravity point of view, altering the standard notion
of locality.
Let us now show that the quadratic constraints (5.65) are weaker than the strong
constraint. For the duality twist, the strong constraint implies
Ω̃EAB Ω̃E CD = 0 .

(5.77)

where Ω̃ABC was defined in (5.56). On the other hand, similar to the BI (3.64), one can
show that
3
3
∂[A fBCD] − f[AB E fCD]E = − Ω̃E[AB Ω̃E CD] .
4
4

(5.78)

For constant gaugings the first term drops out, and then we see that the quadratic constraints correspond to a relaxed version of the strong constraint (5.77), because they only
require the totally antisymmetric part of (5.77) to vanish.
64

This is however not the end of the story. One has to show that there exist solutions to
the quadratic constraints that violate the strong constraint. As we explained, the gauged
supergravities we are dealing with are half-maximal. Half-maximal gauged supergravities
split into two different groups: those that can be obtained by means of a truncation of
a maximal supergravity, and those that cannot (in d = 4 see [92]). The former inherit
the quadratic constraints of the maximal theory, which in the language of the electric
half-maximal gaugings take the form (for simplicity we take λ = 0 in (5.50))
fABC f ABC = 3Ω̃ABC Ω̃ABC = 0 .

(5.79)

Therefore, the genuine half-maximal theories, which violate the above constraint, must be
necessarily generated through a truly doubled duality twist [68]. On the other hand, when
the strong constraint holds, the only reachable theories are those that admit an uplift to
a maximal supergravity. In Figure 2 we have pictured the kind of orbits that one finds
in half-maximal supergravities (the case d = 4 should be analyzed separately due to the
extra SL(2) factor [92]). Let us stress that the notion of non-geometry discussed in [68] is
local, and then a duality orbit of non-geometric fluxes contains all fluxes simultaneously
turned on Habc , ωab c , Qa bc and Rabc . However, one could also define a notion of globally
non-geometric orbit, which could admit a representative without Rabc -flux.
The idea of combining geometric with non-geometric fluxes simultaneously is usually
considered with some precaution. It is common to find objections against these configurations mostly based on scaling arguments. The non-geometric fluxes are sometimes
associated to windings (since they are mostly generated through dual coordinate dependence), while the geometric ones are related to momentum. A quick look at the mass
formula (3.1) shows that, for a given radius R, when momentum (winding) modes are
heavy, the winding (momentum) modes are light. Considering both of them simultaneously then leads to unavoidable heavy modes in the spectrum. This enters in conflict with
the fact that one is truncating the heavy mass levels of the string from the beginning.
The conclusion of this argument is that one should then impose the strong constraint, so
as to truncate the heavy part of the spectrum, and this in turn only permits geometric
orbits.
65

A
Geometric fluxes
Orbits (1)
B
Orbits (2)

Flux space

Figure 2: We picture the space of gaugings (or fluxes) in half-maximal supergravities
in d = 7, 8 [68]. A point in this diagram corresponds to a given configuration. If two
points lie in the same diagonal line (orbit) they are related by a duality transformation.
Different theories are classified by orbits (lines) rather than configurations (points). The
configuration space splits in a subgroup of geometric (i.e. only involving fluxes like Habc
and ωab c ) and non-geometric (involving fluxes Qa bc and Rabc ) configurations. The space of
orbits then splits in two: (1) non-geometric orbits (truly half-maximal) and (2) geometric
orbits (basically maximal) that intersect the geometric space (between A and B).

Notice however that these arguments are purely based on the KK-mode expansions
of fields on tori. The relation between (winding) momentum and (dual) coordinates, is
given by the Fourier transforms of the KK-modes of the torus. Moreover, the mass formula
(3.1) only holds for tori. In this section, we do not consider tori, and moreover, we do not
consider KK excitations. We only consider the zero-modes of the fields on twisted-doubletori. The only connection between these two situations is when the duality twist is taken
to be constant, in which case we would be dealing with the (massless) zero-modes on a
torus, as discussed in section 5.2. When the twist matrix is non-constant, the effective
theory becomes massive, but these masses are corrections to the massless modes on the
torus through a twist. We are then correcting massless modes, through a procedure that
truncates all the problematic (KK) modes. When dealing with moduli fixing, one has
to make sure that for a given non-geometric orbit, the masses of the scalar fields (which
66

are totally unrelated to (3.1)) in a given vacuum are small compared to the scales of the
modes we are neglecting.
A similar reasoning prevents us from relating the strong constraint (or a weaker version
of it) with the LMC condition (3.9), as we explained in Section 3.3. If we had considered
tori compactifications, and kept the tower of excited states, whenever the derivatives in
strong-constraint like terms acted on the mode expansion they would form contractions
like P M PM related to the LMC. Here, we are considering the zero-modes, for which

P M PM = 0 is trivially satisfied because P M = 0. Then, in SS compactifications in which

the tower of KK modes is truncated, it might not be correct to identify the LMC with
strong-like constraints. Instead, the consistency constraints are given by the quadratic
constraints for gaugings (5.65).
Combining fluxes and their derivatives, it is possible to construct three quantities that
vanish upon imposition of the strong constraint [69]:
3
∂[A fBCD] − f[AB E fCD]E = ZABCD ,
4
∂ E fEAB + 2∂[A fB] − f E fEAB = ZAB ,
1
1
∂ E fE − f E fE + fABC f ABC = Z .
2
12

(5.80)
(5.81)
(5.82)

They correspond to duality orbits of generalized BI for all the dual fluxes. The first
two (5.80), (5.81) are related to the constraints of the theory, and are obtained from
compactifications of (3.64). The last one (5.82) was associated to the embedding of the
theory into a maximal theory (5.79).
The fluxes fABC encode the standard T-dual fluxes, as we reviewed. This can be seen
by splitting the indices as
fabc = Habc ,

f a bc = ωbc a ,

f ab c = Qc ab ,

f abc = Rabc .

(5.83)

Through T-dualities they are related according to the chain (5.49). Recall that we are
only dealing here with the case fA = 0. Splitting in components equation (5.80), we find
3
∂[a Hbcd] − He[ab ωcd] e = Zabcd ,
2
67

3∂[a ωbc] d − ∂ d Habc + 3ω[ab e ωc]e d − 3Q[a de Hbc]e = Zabc d ,
2∂[a Qb] cd + 2∂ [c ωab d] − ωab e Qe cd − Habe Recd + 4Q[a e[c ωb]e d] = Zab cd ,

(5.84)

3∂ [a Qd bc] − ∂d Rabc + 3Qe [ab Qd c]e − 3ωde [a Rbc]e = Z abc d ,
3
∂ [a Rbcd] − Re[ab Qe cd] = Z abcd .
2
These reduce to those of [60] for constant fluxes under the strong constraint, and to those
of [93] for non-constant fluxes. Equation (5.82), on the other hand, reads in components
1
1
Habc Rabc + ωab c Qc ab = Z .
6
2

(5.85)

This corresponds to an orthogonality-like condition between geometric (Habc , ωab c ) and
non-geometric (Qa bc , Rabc ) fluxes, as expected. And this is the reason why the failure of
this equation to vanish requires non-geometric fluxes. Therefore, (5.85) can be used to
classify duality orbits of non-geometric fluxes.
Using the extended parameterization of the twist matrix (5.76)


m
n
ua
ua vnm
,
U AM = 
np
a
nm
a
a
u m + u n β vpm
u nβ

(5.86)

and inserting this in the definition of the fluxes (5.56), (5.70)
fABC = 3 U[A| M ∂M U|B N UC]N ,

(5.87)

we find in components
h
i
˜ d vbc] ,
Habc = 3 ∇[a vbc] − vd[a ∇

(5.88)

˜ c vab + 2Γmc [a vb]m + β cm Hmab ,
ωab c = 2Γ[ab] c + ∇

Qc ab = 2Γ[ab] c + ∂c β ab + vcm ∂˜m β ab + 2ωmc [a β b]m − Hmnc β ma β nb ,
i
h
˜ [a β bc] + vmn ∇
˜ n β [ab β c]m + β [am β bn ∇
˜ c] vmn + β am β bn β cl Hmnl ,
Rabc = 3 β [am ∇m β bc] + ∇
where we have used the following relations and definitions
ua m ua n = δnm ,

ua m ub m = δab ,

vab = ua m ub n vmn ,
68

β ab = ua m ub n β mn ,

∂˜a = ua m ∂˜m ,

∂a = ua m ∂m ,
∇a vbc = ∂a vbc − Γab d vdc − Γac d vbd ,

˜ a vbc = ∂˜a vbc + Γad b vdc + Γad c vbd ,
∇

∇a β bc = ∂a β bc + Γad b β dc + Γad c β bd ,

˜ a β bc = ∂˜a β bc − Γab d β dc − Γac d β bd ,
∇

and
Γab c = ua m ∂˜m ub n uc n .

Γab c = ua m ∂m ub n ec n ,

(5.89)

The expressions (5.88) are very useful to explore the uplifting of fluxes to higher dimensional theories. Notice that while Habc and ωab c can be generated through geometric twists
ua m and vmn , the non-geometric fluxes Qa bc and/or Rabc require β-twists and/or dual coordinate dependence. This also serves to show that the distinction between “globally”
and “locally” non-geometric fluxes is just a terminology inherited from the toy example
discussed before, since Qa bc can arise from dual coordinate dependence, and Rabc can arise
from globally non-geometric compactifications with non-trivial β-twist. Setting β ij = 0
and ∂˜i = 0, the expressions (5.88) reduce to (5.26).

69

6

U-duality and extended geometry

The compactification of D = 11 supergravity and M-theory on an n-dimensional torus,
enjoys a U-duality symmetry En(n) (see for example [94, 95, 96]). The idea of extending
the space-time and/or the tangent space so as to accommodate such symmetries was
introduced in [38], [39] and more recently considered in [40, 44, 46]. In this section, we
review some of the approaches to replace the T-duality group by the U-duality group, in
order to incorporate all the extra fields (like R-R in Type II theories or the three-form
of M-theory) in a duality covariant manner, much under the same philosophy as that of
DFT.

6.1

Generalized diffeomorphisms and the section condition

We have seen that the generalized diffeomorphisms of DFT (3.39) discussed in the previous
sections enjoy the following properties:
• They preserve the duality group invariant, in that case the O(D, D) metric ηM N .
• They are defined in terms of an invariant Y -tensor related to the definition of the
strong constraint.
• They reproduce the gauge transformations of the D-dimensional metric and twoform, upon application of the strong constraint.
• When “twisted”, they give rise to fluxes or gaugings in the representations allowed
by supersymmetry.
• Their closure imposes a set of constraints that, on the one hand are solved by
the strong constraint, and on the other, reproduce the quadratic constraints of the
supergravity gaugings upon “twisting”.
Clearly, the inclusion of other fields, like R-R sector in Type II string theory or the more
general three-form of M-theory, requires an enlargement and further generalization of the

70

already generalized Lie derivative, to be compatible now with U-duality. All the transformation properties of gravitational and tensorial degrees of freedom, which mix under
U-duality, must now be accommodated (and unified) in a new generalized Lie derivative.
We will see that such a generalized transformation enjoys the U-duality extension of the
properties listed above.
This generalization is a little more involved since the U-duality group jumps with
dimension. For the n internal dimensions of M-theory, it corresponds to exceptional groups
En(n) , and in n > 8 one encounters the complication of infinite-dimensional Kac-Moody
type algebras. Given the disconnected structure of the groups for different dimensions, it
is convenient to work case by case. As in DFT, where the space is doubled to account for
the winding degrees of freedom of the string, here the space is further enlarged to account
for the wrapping states of M-branes. The internal space is then replaced by an extended
mega-space with extended dimensions, and here for simplicity we neglect the external
space-time. Relevant representations for the different U-duality groups are given in Table
3. The mega-space associated to each of them is dim(R1 )-dimensional.
R1

R2

10

5

E5(5) = SO(5, 5) 16

10

E4(4) = SL(5)

E6(6)

27

27

E7(7)

56

133

Table 3: Some relevant representations of U-duality groups [45].
The generalized diffeomorphisms [47, 44] formally preserve the structure of those analyzed before for DFT (we are using the notation of [45])
Lξ V M = Lξ V M + Y M N P Q ∂P ξ Q V N ,

(6.1)

where Y is a U-duality invariant tensor “measuring” the departure from the usual Lie
derivative. It can be generically decomposed as
M P
M P
δQ ,
Y M N P Q = δQ
δN − αP(adj) M N P Q + βδN

71

(6.2)

where P(adj) is a projector to the adjoint representation of the U-duality group, α is a
group-theoretical quantity that depends on the dimension, and β is a weight for tensorial
densities that also depends on the group. Indices M, N are in the R1 reps of Table 3,
and P(adj) corresponds to the adjoint projection contained in the tensor product R1 ⊗ R1 .
It can be checked that these generalized Lie derivatives preserve the invariants of each
group. The appearance of the last β-term is due to the fact that in the U-duality case
one usually considers En(n) × R+ tensorial densities rather than just tensors (we will be
more specific later).
Before showing the general results, to warm up let us first see how the DFT O(n, n)
case fits in this language. The projector to the adjoint representation is given by
O(n, n) :

1 M P
P(adj) M N P Q = (δQ
δN − η M P ηN Q ) ,
2

(6.3)

and then, introducing this in (6.2) and comparing with (3.31), we find that the correct
value of the proportionality constants is given by (α, β) = (2, 0) for un-weighted tensors.
More generally, the expression for Y in the different duality groups is given in Table 4.
Y M QN P

α

β

O(n, n)

η M N ηP Q

2

0

E4(4) = SL(5)

ǫiM N ǫiP Q

3

1
5

E5(5) = SO(5, 5)

1
(γ i )M N (γi )P Q
2

4

1
4

E6(6)

10dM N Rd¯P QR

6

1
3

E7(7)

12K M N P Q + δP δQ + 21 ǫM N ǫP Q

12

1
2

(M N )

Table 4: Invariant Y -tensor and proportionality constants for different dimensions. Here
ηM N is the O(n, n) invariant metric, ǫiM N is the SL(5) alternating tensor, (γ i )M N are
16 × 16 MW representation of the SO(5, 5) Clifford algebra, dM N R and K M N P Q are the
symmetric invariant tensors of E6(6) and E7(7) respectively, and ǫM N is the symplectic

invariant in E7(7) . These results were taken from [45], we refer to that paper for more
details.

72

In the U-duality case, there is also an analogue of the strong constraint, also known
as section condition [47, 44]
P(R2 )M N P Q ∂P ∂Q (. . . ) = 0 ,

(6.4)

which again acts on any product of fields and gauge parameters. Generically, any solution to this condition picks out an n-dimensional subspace of the mega-space, which
can be associated to the physical space in M-theory compactifications. Again, when analyzing closure of these generalized diffeomorphisms, one finds that closure is achieved
automatically when restricted to configurations satisfying the section condition.
Analogously to the DFT case, when a duality twist reduction of these generalized Lie
derivatives is performed, they induce an effective gauge transformation giving rise to the
embedding tensor components of the different maximal gauged supergravities for different
dimensions. The analogies don’t stop here, since it is also possible to construct an extended geometrical formalism, introducing generalized connections, torsion and covariant
Ricci-like tensors for these generalized transformations. Lets now review how this works,
specializing to the E7(7) case for a detailed exposition.
The cases n ≤ 7 were studied in [44] and [45]. The cases n ≤ 2 just reduce to ordinary
Riemannian geometry. The case n = 4 was studied in [53] in the context of gauged
supergravities, and a geometry for it was considered in [49]. The cases n = 5 and 6 were
related to SS compactifications in [54], and n = 7 in [55], where an extended geometry
was also formulated. A unified geometric description for n ≤ 7 was considered in [50].
The case n = 8 was explored in [51], and for n > 8 the groups are much more involved.
An ambitious programme intended to encompass all formulations under E11 can be found
in [41].

6.2

The E7(7) case and maximal gauged supergravity

E7(7) is the U-duality group of gauged maximal supergravity in four dimensions [97], the
ungauged theory being obtained through compactifications of M-theory on a seven-torus
[98]. The idea here is to replace the internal seven-space by a 56-dimensional mega-space,
73

and accommodate the internal degrees of freedom in a generalized metric HM N defined on
the mega-space. This idea was first considered in [63], and here we will present the results
of [55]. Since we are ignoring the four-dimensional space time, the generalized metric
should be identified with the scalar degrees of freedom of the gauged supergravity. The
generalized metric transforms covariantly under G = E7(7) × R+ , and is invariant under
the maximal compact subgroup H = SU(8). It can be written in terms of a generalized
bein EĀ M taking values in the quotient G/H
EĀ M = e−∆ ẼĀ M ,

(6.5)

where we have separated a conformal factor ∆ corresponding to the R+ components.
Here the flat indices Ā, B̄, . . . take values in H and the curved ones M, N, . . . in G.
Then, ẼĀ M lives in the quotient E7(7) /SU(8), and the tilde refers to the E7(7) part of G
only. G has a (weighted) symplectic invariant ωM N that raises and lowers indices, and
a quartic invariant KM N P Q which is totally symmetric. The fundamental representation
of E7(7) is 56 and the adjoint is 133. Given a tensorial density V M , the generalized Lie
derivative (or equivalently the exceptional Dorfman bracket) reads
1
Lξ V M = ξ P ∂P V M − 12P(adj) M N P Q ∂P ξ Q V N − ∂P ξ P V M .
2

(6.6)

Here P(adj)((M N )(P Q)) is the projector to the adjoint representation, defined in terms of the
E7(7) invariants
P(adj)M N P Q = (tα )N M (tα )P Q =

1
ωM (P ωQ)N + KM N P Q .
12

(6.7)

As we did before in the DFT case, here we can compute the closure of these transformations
∆123 M = −∆ξ1 Lξ2 ξ3M = ([Lξ1 , Lξ2 ] − LLξ1 ξ2 )ξ3M = 0 ,
and get
I
I
∂O ξ1]L ξ3N
∆[12]3 M = Y Q L O I ∂O ξ[2
ξ1]L ∂Q ξ3M + AM N J L Y Q J O I ∂Q ξ[2
I
+ QM N QO LI ∂Q ∂O ξ[2
ξ1]L ξ3N = 0 ,
I
L
L
I
∆(12)3 M = −Y Q L O I ∂Q ξ(1
ξ2)
∂O ξ3M + QM N QO LI ∂Q (ξ(1
∂O ξ2)
) ξ3N

74

(6.8)

+

1
ωLI ω QO ∂Q ξ1L ∂O ξ2I ξ3M = 0 ,
4

(6.9)

where we have defined
1
1
M
QM N QO LI = Y Q J O (L AJ I) M N + ωIL Y QM O N − Y Q L O I δN
.
2
2
Notice that all derivatives are contracted as


1 MN
MN
M N
∂M ∂N .
ω ωP Q − 12P(adj)P Q
Y P Q ∂M ∂N =
2

(6.10)

(6.11)

As we mentioned in the previous section, when the so-called section condition (6.4)
P(adj)P Q M N ∂M ∂N (. . . ) = 0

(6.12)

is imposed, the closure condition ∆123 M = 0 is automatically satisfied. In fact, it can
be seen that any solution to this condition selects a seven-dimensional subspace of the
full 56-dimensional mega-space, permitting to make contact with the physical internal
compact directions. When (6.12) holds, it can also be proven that ω M N ∂M ∂N (. . . ) = 0,
and therefore also Y M P N Q ∂M ∂N (. . . ) = 0, in analogy with DFT (3.30).
Following the DFT logic (3.57), we can now define a dynamical flux
LEĀ EB̄ = FĀB̄ C̄ EC̄ ,

(6.13)

1
FĀB̄ C̄ = ΩĀB̄ C̄ − 12P(adj) C̄ B̄ D̄ Ē ΩD̄Ā Ē + ΩD̄Ā D̄ δB̄C̄ ,
2

(6.14)

ΩĀB̄ C̄ = EĀ M ∂M EB̄ N (E −1 )N C̄ ,

(6.15)

with

where

is the G-generalized Weitzenböck connection. Rotating these expressions with the bein
we can define the fluxes with curved indices
1
P
,
FM N P = ΩM N P − 12P(adj) P N R S ΩRM S + ΩRM R δN
2

(6.16)

and the corresponding Weitzenböck connection in curved indices takes values in the algebra of G
P
ΩM N P = −∂M ∆ δN
+ Ω̃M N P = ΩM 0 (t0 )N P + Ω̃M α (tα )N P .

75

(6.17)

P
Here, (t0 )N P = −δN
is the generator of R+ . The 56 × 133 part

Ω̃M N P = (Ẽ −1 )N B̄ ∂M ẼB̄ P ,

(6.18)

contains the irreducible representations 56 × 133 = 56 + 912 + 6480. The projectors
onto the first two representations in this product are given by [99]
56 α
(t tβ )M N ,
133
1 α N
12
4
=
δβ δM − (tβ tα )M N + (tα tβ )M N .
7
7
7

P(56)M α ,N β =
P(912)M α ,N β

(6.19)

Equations (6.16) to (6.19) imply that the fluxes are in the 912 and 56 representations
only. More precisely
FM N P = XM N P + DM N P ,

(6.20)

with
XM N P = ΘM α (tα )N P with

ΘM α = 7P(912)M α ,N β Ω̃N β ,

(6.21)

and
P
DM N P = −ϑM δN
+ 8P(adj) P N Q M ϑQ ,

1
ϑM = − (Ω̃P M P − 3∂M ∆) .
2

(6.22)

The fluxes F involve therefore a projection onto the 912 given by the gaugings XM N P
plus contributions from the gaugings ϑM . As in the DFT case, in the language of gauged
supergravity they correspond to the gauge group generators, i.e. they are contractions of
the embedding tensor with the generators of the global symmetry group. For this reason,
we will sometimes call them “gaugings”. The XM N P piece in (6.20) corresponds to the
912 component of the fluxes, satisfying the properties
XM [N P ] = XM P P = X(M N P ) = XP M P = 0 ,

(6.23)

which are the well known conditions satisfied by gaugings in maximal supergravity. The
DM N P piece (6.22), on the other hand, contains two terms: one belonging to the 56
associated to R+ , and another one belonging to the 56 in 56 × 133. Notice, however,
that both terms contain the same degrees of freedom in terms of ϑM and are therefore

76

not independent. With these results, we are able to express the gauge group generators
(FM )N P as in [100]
FM = ϑM t0 + (ΘM α + 8ϑP (tα )M P )tα .

(6.24)

In terms of FĀB̄ C̄ , the closure conditions (6.9) evaluated on frames read
∆ĀB̄C̄

D̄



Ē

= − [FĀ , FB̄ ] + FĀB̄ FĒ



C̄

D̄

(6.25)

1
F̄
Ē
D̄
Ē D̄
−2∂[Ā FB̄] C̄ D̄ − 12P(adj)
C̄ F̄ ∂Ē FĀB̄ + ∂Ē FĀB̄ δC̄ = 0 .
2
When the fluxes are constant, we recover the quadratic constraints of maximal gauged supergravity. Notice that, as it happens in DFT, these constraints can be satisfied through
configurations that violate the section condition. This implies necessarily going beyond
supergravity, and then gives rise to a novel description of non-geometry in maximal supergravity. This might be useful, for instance, to find an extended geometrical uplift of
the new SO(8) gaugings [102], which seem to find obstructions when it comes to uplifts
to D = 11 supergravity [103]. The conditions (6.25), in turn, imply that the dynamical
fluxes in flat indices behave as scalars under the following generalized diffeomorphisms
with respect to frame-vectors
δξ FĀB̄ C̄ = ξ D̄ ∂D̄ FĀB̄ C̄ + ξ D̄ ∆D̄ ĀB̄ C̄ .

(6.26)

We can now proceed as in the DFT case, and look for a geometric construction that
gives the action from traces of some generalized Ricci tensor. Of course, since we only deal
with scalars here, the action will be the scalar potential of the maximal theory. Having
defined the generalized notion of Lie derivative in (6.6), it is natural to look for derivatives
that behave covariantly under such transformations. We begin by defining the covariant
derivative of a bein EĀ M as
∇M EĀ N = ωM Ā B̄ EB̄ N = ∂M EĀ N + ΓM P N EĀ P ,

(6.27)

in terms of a Christoffel connection Γ, or alternatively a spin connection ω. They are
related to the Weitzenböck connection defined in (6.15), which takes values in the algebra
of G. In addition, one can relate the gaugings to the Weitzenböck connection through
77

projections, as in equation (6.14). These connections must also transform properly so
as to compensate the failure of the derivative to transform as a tensor. Given that the
covariant derivative is requested to transform covariantly, so must the spin connection.
We can define the generalized torsion through [44]
M
,
TĀB̄ C̄ ≡ (E −1 )M C̄ (L∇
EĀ − LEĀ )EB̄

(6.28)

where L∇ is defined as in (6.6), but with a partial replaced by a covariant derivative.
Using (6.27) we arrive at
1
TĀB̄ C̄ = ωĀB̄ C̄ − 12P(adj) C̄ B̄ P̄ Q̄ ωP̄ Ā Q̄ + ωD̄Ā D̄ δB̄C̄ − FĀB̄ C̄ .
2

(6.29)

√

H does not transform as a density under the generalized diffeomorphisms (6.1),
√
the proper measure is given by ( H)−1/28 = e−2∆ since
Since

δξ e−2∆ = ∂P (e−2∆ ξ P ) .

(6.30)

This can be used to impose compatibility with the determinant of the generalized metric,
and together with vanishing torsion they determine the spin connection (which lives in
56 × 133) up to a 6480 piece. This piece remains undetermined under these conditions,
but a part of it (corresponding to the 63 in 133 = 63 + 70) can be fixed through metric
compatibility.
It can then be shown that a torsionless and metric compatible spin connection has in
particular the following determined components
WP M P = −2ϑM
1
XQR S
7
16
= − P(adj) S R T Q ϑT ,
19

P(912)QR S ,M N P WM N P =
P(56)QR S ,M N P WM N P

(6.31)

where the projectors here are those of (6.19) contracted with the E7(7) generators. This
is analog to (4.37) and (4.40) in DFT, where the projections there simply amounted to
tracing and antisymmetrizing the spin connection.

78

Finally, following the DFT geometrical construction, a generalized Ricci tensor can be
constructed [44] (unlike the DFT case, the definition of a Riemann tensor is less clear)
RM N =


1
RM N + RN M + ΓRM P Y R P S Q ΓSN Q − ΩRM P Y R P S Q ΩSN Q
2

(6.32)

which is covariant for solutions to the closure constraints. When tracing it with the
generalized metric we can then define a generalized Ricci scalar
1
R = HM N RM N
4

(6.33)

which, for any torsionless and metric compatible connection, can be cast in the form
R=


1
XM N P XQR S HM Q HN R HP S + 7HM N XM P Q XN Q P
672

(6.34)

provided the gaugings ϑM = 0. Remarkably, this is exactly the scalar potential of maximal
supergravity with the very exact overall factor. The relative factor 7 is related to that in
(6.31) and can be traced back to the fact that the generalized Lie derivatives are consistent
with supersymmetry, in that they generate fluxes in accordance to the linear constraints
of the maximal theory.
Finally, notice that the Ricci scalar (6.34) can be combined with the measure (6.30)
to render a gauge invariant action
S=

Z

dXe−2∆ R .

(6.35)

We have left some important points uncovered here. One of them is the coupling between this “scalar” internal sector with the rest of the theory, i.e. the external space-time,
its metric and vectors (plus the p-form hierarchy of maximal supergravities [101]). Steps
in this direction were recently performed in [104]. The other one is the relation between
this setup with string or M-theory degrees of freedom. To establish the correspondence,
one then has to provide a proper parameterization of the generalized bein or generalized
metric (see for instance [40, 44, 46]).

79

7

Worldsheet motivations and approaches to DFT

As discussed in the previous sections, DFT was formulated with the purpose of incorporating T-duality, an essentially stringy effect, into a particle field theory. Clearly, it
would be interesting to deduce DFT from a world-sheet action, much in the same way as
supergravity is obtained as the low energy effective field theory from the two-dimensional
description of the string dynamics. In this section, we briefly review some of the attempts
that have been followed to construct an O(D, D) covariant two-dimensional world-sheet
theory, from which DFT might be explicitly derived.
Before proceeding to DFT, we briefly recall the process leading from the world-sheet
theory to supergravity. We refer the reader to the string theory books [3] and references
therein for a more detailed and complete discussion of this issue. We then discuss how
the procedure has been implemented for DFT.

7.1

The string spacetime action

Strings propagating in backgrounds of massless closed string states are described by an
interacting two dimensional field theory, obtained by exponentiating the vertex operators
creating those states. The action is given by
Z
√  ab


1
2
ab
i
j
′
S=
d
σ
h
g
(x)
+
iǫ
b
(x)
∂
x
∂
x
+
α
Rφ(x)
.
h
ij
ij
a
b
4πα′

(7.1)

This is a non-linear sigma model where α′ is the square of the string length scale, σ a , a =
0, 1 refer to the worldsheet coordinates τ, σ, respectively, gij is the spacetime metric, bij
is the antisymmetric tensor, the dilaton involves φ and the trace of gij , and R is the
curvature scalar of the worldsheet.
A consistent string theory requires the two-dimensional quantum field theory to have
local Weyl and Lorentz invariance. This implies that the trace and ǫab contraction of the
energy-momentum tensor, respectively, should vanish on-shell, which imposes rather nontrivial conditions on the admissible background fields. Actually, to regulate divergences
in a quantum theory, one has to introduce a UV cut-off, and therefore, physical quantities typically depend on the scale of a given process after renormalization. Conformal
80

invariance is achieved if the coupling constants do not depend on the scale of the theory.
In this case, the couplings are g, b and φ and the scale dependence is described by the
β−functions of the renormalization group.
The β−functions are computed perturbatively. One first expands the fields xi (τ, σ)
around a classical solution xi = xicl + π i , where π i is the quantum fluctuation. The
expansion of the Lagrangian then gets quadratic kinetic terms plus interactions of the
fluctuations. The theory has an infinite number of coupling constants: all order derivatives
of the background fields evaluated at xicl . When all the couplings are small, the theory
is then weakly coupled. Assuming the target space has a characteristic length scale Rc ,
the effective dimensionless couplings are of the order α′1/2 Rc−1 , and then perturbation
theory makes sense if Rc is much greater than the string scale. Up to terms involving two
spacetime derivatives, the β−functions are given by
βijg = α′ Rij + 2α′∇i ∇j φ −

α′
Hikl Hjkl + O(α′) ,
4

α′ k
∇ Hkij + α′ Hkij ∇k φ + O(α′2 ) ,
2
α′
D − Dcrit α′ 2
− ∇ φ + α′ ∇k φ∇k φ − Hijk H ijk + O(α′2) ,
=
4
2
24

βijb = −
βφ

(7.2)

where Rij is the spacetime Ricci tensor, to be distinguished from the worldsheet Ricci
tensor Rab . Terms with more derivatives are higher order in α′1/2 Rc−1 . Combining (7.2)
one then recovers (3.19). The term D − Dcrit in β φ is the classical Weyl anomaly, which
vanishes in the critical dimension Dcrit = 26 (Dcrit = 10) in (super)string theory in flat
spacetime, ensuring that the negative norm states decouple.
The vanishing β−functions equations, determining Weyl invariance and UV finiteness
of the theory, can be interpreted as the equations of motion derived from the following
spacetime action


Z
1
2(D − Dcrit )
D √ −2φ
ijk
i
′
S = d x ge
+ R − Hijk H + 4∂i φ∂ φ + O(α ) .
−
3α′
12

(7.3)

We recognize here the action for the bosonic universal gravity sector introduced in (3.17).4
4

The equation of motion (3.21) combined with the trace of (3.19) reproduce β φ here when D = Dcrit .

81

This action can alternatively be obtained from the low energy limit of scattering
amplitudes of massless string modes. Low energies here refer to energies much smaller
1

than the string scale, i.e. E << (α′ )− 2 , which is equivalent to fixing E and taking the
limit α′ → 0. Recalling the mass spectrum of closed strings
M2 =

2
(N + Ñ − 2) ,
α′

(7.4)

where N, Ñ are the number operators for the left and right moving string modes, we see
that it is in this regime that massive modes decouple and backgrounds of massive string
states can be consistently neglected.
The T-duality symmetry of string scattering amplitudes suggests that a T-duality
covariant formulation of the string worldsheet action should exist, from which one could
derive a T-duality covariant effective action, following a procedure analogous to the one
we have just described for conventional string theory. In the rest of this section, we
review various proposals that have been worked out in the literature in order to obtain
such formulation and we then discuss their connection with DFT.

7.2

Double string sigma model

Originally, T-duality on the worldsheet was implemented in two-dimensional nonlinear
sigma models in backgrounds with n compact dimensions in which the metric and twoform fields have an isometry along the compact directions [82, 83, 105]. By gauging the
isometry through a gauge connection and adding to the action a Lagrange multiplier
constraining it to be pure gauge, so that the number of worldsheet degrees of freedom
remains the same, one obtains the dual theory.
Specifically, suppose the non-linear sigma model (7.1) describing the string dynamics
in a metric and two-form background
Z
1
¯ j,
S=
d2 z (gij + bij )∂xi ∂x
2π

(7.5)

is invariant under an isometry acting by translation of xκ and the fields gij and bij are
independent of xκ (here xκ refers to one or more of the spacetime coordinates). Here,
82

we disregard the dilaton and use complex coordinates z = σ + iτ, z̄ = σ − iτ on a flat
worldsheet in units in which α′ = 1/2. The dual theory can be found from the extended
action
S

′

1
=
2π

Z



¯ κ) ,
d2 z (gij + bij )Dxi D̄xj + x̃κ (∂ Āκ − ∂A

(7.6)

where Dxκ = ∂xκ + Aκ , and the Lagrange multiplier x̃κ enforces the pure gauge condition
¯ κ = 0. Gauge fixing xκ = 0, one obtains the dual model
∂ Āκ − ∂A
Z
1
S̃ =
d2 z(g̃ij + b̃ij )∂ x̃i ∂¯x̃j
2π

(7.7)

by integrating out the gauge fields. In this new theory, g̃ij and b̃ij are given by Buscher’s
rules (3.11)
g̃κκ =

1
,
gκκ

g̃κi =

b̃κi =

gκi
,
gκκ

b̃ij = bij +

bκi
,
gκκ

g̃ij = gij −

gκi gκj − bκi bκj
,
gκκ

gκi bκj − bκi gκj
.
gκκ

(7.8)

Clearly, the background fields are in general completely changed by the duality transformation.
In [106], the (abelian) T-duality transformations were reformulated in terms of chiral
Noether currents associated with the isometries, and it was shown that any dual pair of
sigma models can be obtained by gauging different combinations of chiral currents. The
equivalence of dual sigma models at the quantum level was analyzed in [107], where it was
shown that, while one Lagrangian representation is I.R. free, the dual one is asymptotically
free.
This initial approach to deal with T-duality in the worldsheet theory allows to map a
sigma model action to its T-dual one, but neither of them is manifestly O(D, D) covariant.
However, as mentioned above, the T-duality symmetry of string theory suggests that an
O(D, D) covariant worldsheet action should exist. A natural guess for such formulation
would be a sigma model where the target space coordinates are doubled. Actually, a
democratic treatment of momentum and winding modes leads to consider independently
83

the ordinary target space coordinates xi = xi+ (σ +τ )+xi− (σ −τ ) associated to momentum

and the dual ones x̃i = xi+ (σ + τ ) − xi− (σ − τ ) associated to winding, or equivalently, the
left- and right-moving closed string fields. Moreover, since T-duality mixes the metric and
two-form fields, it is reasonable to expect that these fields combine to form the generalized
metric HM N in (3.22). These heuristic arguments lead to a world-sheet action of the form
 
Z
x̃i
S = dX M ∧ ⋆dX N HM N ,
XM =   ,
(7.9)
xi
where ⋆ is the Hodge dual operation on the worldsheet, which is manifestly duality co-

variant and two dimensional Lorentz invariant. However, this action describes twice as
many degrees of freedom as the action (7.5), and then, it has to be supplemented with
additional constraints in order to eliminate the extra coordinates and be able to reproduce
the same physics.
A different approach was followed by A. Tseytlin, who was able to construct a manifestly O(D, D) covariant worldsheet action for chiral bosons [13]. Evidencing that Tduality is a canonical transformation of the phase space of string theory [108], O(D, D)
covariance is achieved through a first order action in time derivatives:
Z

1
S =
d2 σ HM N ∂1 X M ∂1 X N − ηM N ∂0 X M ∂1 X N ,
2

(7.10)

which can be naturally interpreted as being expressed in terms of phase space variables,
with the dual fields playing the role of the integrated canonical momenta. This action is
invariant under the following sigma model type symmetry
X → ηX ,

H → η T Hη ,

(7.11)

transforming both the fields and the couplings.
The price for having duality as a symmetry of the action is the lack of two-dimensional
Lorentz invariance. Indeed, introducing the left and right moving parts of the string
coordinates as independent off-shell fields, one has to face the issue of having to deal with
a non-Lorentz invariant action. This is actually the case in any Lagrangian description
of chiral scalars, as originally discussed in [109], and in general, Lorentz invariance is
84

recovered on-shell [12, 13, 110]. Local Lorentz invariance is achieved here if HM N is
either constant or depends only on half of the coordinates (in the language of DFT,
Lorentz invariance requires the strong constraint [37]). The equivalence of the equations
of motion following from (7.10) with those of the ordinary sigma-model (7.5) was shown
in [37].
One way to obtain the action (7.10) starting from (7.1) (setting φ = 0), is to write the
Hamiltonian density in a manifestly O(D, D) invariant form, in terms of the canonical
momenta pi conjugate to xi : pi = −gij ∂0 xj + bij ∂1 xj , namely


pi
1

H = ΨM HM N ΨN ,
with
ΨM = 
2
∂1 xi

.

(7.12)

Identifying the momenta pi with the dual coordinates x̃i as pi = ∂1 x̃i , and rewriting the

Lagrangian as L = pi ∂0 xi − H, the action (7.1) can be recast in terms of the double
coordinates X M as
Z

1
S=
d2 σ HM N ∂1 X M ∂1 X N − ηM N ∂0 X M ∂1 X N − ΩM N ∂0 X M ∂1 X N
2

(7.13)

where



ΩM N = 

0

δi
i

−δ j

j

0



.

(7.14)

The Ω-term does not contribute to the field equations and does not affect the classical
theory, but it is necessary in the quantum theory [14] and, in particular, to show the equivalence of the doubled to the conventional partition function [35].5 The correspondence
with the standard formulation of critical string theory only appears after integrating out
one of the dual fields. Then, either the original or the dual Lorentz invariant action is
recovered.
A similar procedure was followed by W. Siegel in the so-called two-vielbein formalism
[105], where the metric and antisymmetric tensor are combined in two independent vielbeins. Alternatively, as demonstrated in [111], the non-Lorentz invariant doubled action
(7.10) can be obtained by fixing the axial gauge in the duality and Lorentz invariant
5

Reference [35] also shows the modular invariance of the one loop double string theory.

85

extended action (7.6). More recently in [112], a manifestly Lorentz invariant action was
obtained based on a path integral analysis at the quantum level.
Tseytlin’s formulation can be generalized to allow for background fields with arbitrary
dependence on the double coordinates, i.e. other than a generalized metric HM N (X)
generically depending on the double coordinates, one can include a symmetric matrix
GM N (X) generalizing ηM N , and an antisymmetric tensor CM N (X):
Z


1
S=
d2 σ −(CM N (X) + GM N (X))∂0 X M ∂1 X N + HM N (X)∂1 X M ∂1 X N .
2

(7.15)

Demanding on-shell Lorentz symmetry of this action gives constraint equations for the
background fields.6 Classical solutions of these equations were found in [75]. More general
non-linear sigma models of this form, in which the generalized metric is replaced by a
generic symmetric matrix, were analyzed in [113], and it was shown that the solutions
to the Lorentz invariance constraints give an action with the form of the Poisson-Lie
T-duality action introduced in [114].
For completeness we list here other approaches that have been followed in the literature

to construct double sigma models.
• In backgrounds with a toroidal fibre, the string dynamics can be described by the
(partially) doubled formalism introduced by C. Hull in [14]. This formalism describes a worldsheet embedding into backgrounds that are locally T n bundles, with
coordinates (Y i , XA ), where Y i are the coordinates of the base and XA are the coordinates of the doubled torus fibre. The Lagrangian is a sum of an ordinary sigma
model Lagrangian L(Y ) like that in (7.1) plus a sigma model for the generalized
metric HAB of the doubled fibres, which crucially only depends on Y i and there is
isometry in all the fibre directions:
1
1
L = HAB (Y )dXA ∧ ⋆dXB + ΩAB dXA ∧ dXB + L(Y ) .
4
2

(7.16)

The action must be supplemented with the chirality constraint
dXA = η AB HBC ⋆ dXC ,
6

The term with coupling CMN (X) is clearly Lorentz invariant.

86

(7.17)

ensuring that the fibre directions can be thought of as chiral bosons on the worldsheet, so that the doubling does not increase the number of physical degrees of
freedom.
This doubled formalism has been very useful in elucidating the structure of nongeometric backgrounds, such as T-folds.
• In [36] the constraint (7.17) was incorporated into the action, which then reads:
Z


1
S=
d2 σ −Gαβ ∂1 X α ∂1 X α + Lαβ ∂1 X α ∂0 X β + Kαβ ∂0 X α ∂0 X β ,
(7.18)
2
where X α = (Y i , XA ) and


gij
0
,
Gαβ = 
0 HAB



Lαβ = 

0

0

0 ηAB



,



Kαβ = 

gij 0
0

gij being the standard sigma model metric for the base.

0



,

(7.19)

• For doubled backgrounds which are locally a group manifold, the non-linear Poisson
Lie sigma model proposed in [114] was rewritten in [115] as
I
Z

1
1
2
A
B
A
B
S=
d σ HAB ∂1 X ∂1 X − ηAB ∂1 X ∂0 X +
tIJK dX I ∧ dX J ∧ dX K ,
2
12 V
(7.20)
where V is the volume of the membrane whose boundary is the string worldsheet
and tIJK are the structure constants of the gauge algebra.

7.3

DFT from the double sigma model

We have seen that the vanishing β−functions equations can be interpreted as equations
of motion derived from the string low energy effective field theory. It is then through
the background field equations of the double sigma model that one expects to make the
connection between string theory and DFT. But this raises some conceptual questions.
For instance, perturbation theory in the non-linear sigma model (7.1) is performed around
the large volume limit. Can one also define a perturbation theory around the limit of very
small substringy sizes of the background? Or even more puzzling, is there a well defined
weak-coupling limit of the T-duality invariant models (7.10) or (7.15)?
87

These questions have been analyzed by several authors from different viewpoints. From
the β−functions standpoint, the background field method was adapted to the doubled
coordinates, expanding them around a classical solution as X M = XclM + ΠM . Since the
fluctuation ΠM does not in general transform as a vector, in order to have a covariant
expansion, the expansion parameter is defined as the tangent vector to the geodesic from
XclM to XclM +ΠM whose length is equal to that of the geodesic. Since this is a contravariant
vector, the expansion is then organized in terms of covariant objects.
The crucial point to elucidate in order to consistently apply this method to the double
sigma models is how to define geodesics in double geometries. The simplest options
starting from the action (7.15) are to consider geodesics of GM N or geodesics of HM N ,
with the resulting expansions involving covariant derivatives and tensors with respect to
the chosen metric. The background field method was first applied to the sigma model of
Hull’s doubled formalism in [36] using geodesics of HM N . This was then generalized in
[75] for the sigma model (7.15) where the expansion was also performed using geodesics
of GM N and general expressions for the Weyl and Lorentz anomaly terms were found.
UV finiteness and worldsheet Weyl invariance at one loop were shown in [36] to require the vanishing of the generalized Ricci tensor when DFT is restricted to a fibered
background of the type that the doubled formalism describes. In [37], the vanishing
β H −function equation from the sigma model (7.10), with HM N arbitrarily depending on
any of the doubled coordinates, subject to the strong constraint, was found to match
the equation of motion for the generalized metric obtained from the DFT action (3.71).
Hence, conformal invariance of the double chiral sigma model (7.10) under the strong
constraint, corresponds to the generalized Ricci flatness equation, and this implies that
DFT is the spacetime effective field theory of the double worldsheet action. A preliminary
similar result was also found in [37] for the generalized dilaton.
Although imposing the strong constraint means the theory is no longer truly doubled,
the appearance of the generalized Ricci tensor in this context is non-trivial and seems
evidence not only of an effective double geometry, but also of a string theory origin of
DFT. Nevertheless, it would be interesting to investigate if these conclusions still hold

88

beyond the strong constraint, in a truly double space. Indeed, as extensively discussed in
the preceding sections, DFT with the strong constraint is equivalent to the standard field
theory description of the massless modes of the string. Actually, the strong constraint
implies one can perform an O(D, D) rotation so that the fields only depend on xi and,
since all O(D, D) indices in the action are contracted properly, its form is preserved under
such a rotation.
Furthermore, we have seen that in standard string theory, perturbation theory makes
sense in the background field expansion of the action (7.1) if α′1/2 << Rc and in this
regime one can also neglect the massive string states. In order to analyze the validity
of perturbation theory in the double space, since O(n, n) duality is a symmetry of string
theory on an n−torus with a constant bij background, which survives in the effective
field theory when it is dimensionally reduced on T n , it is convenient to recall the mass
spectrum of closed strings in these backgrounds. In terms of the quantized canonical
momenta pi = nRi and winding numbers p̃i , the mass in d = D − n dimensions is given by
2
1
gij (vLi vLj + vRi vRj ) + ′ (N + Ñ − 2) ,
′2
2α
α
n

j
= α′ g ij
+ bjk p̃k R ± p̃i R ,
R

m2 =
i
vL,R

(7.21)

where N, Ñ are the number operators for the left and right moving oscillators, respectively, of all the coordinates: compact and non-compact (we are assuming, for simplicity,
the same radius R for all compact dimensions). DFT deals with massless states of the
D−dimensional theory, i.e. having N = Ñ = 1, and then it includes all the momentum
and winding modes of the lower dimensional theory, which are massive. Since it truncates
the massive levels (of the decompactified theory), one wonders whether this corresponds
to a consistent truncation. Then, a better understanding of this issue seems necessary in
order to strengthen the link between string theory and DFT. By the same token, given
that a T-duality symmetric description treats the compactification scale and its inverse
on an equal footing, it seems important to clarify what is the rank of parameters for
which the coupling constants are small and the theory is weakly coupled, so that the
perturbative expansion can be trusted.
Another way to tackle these issues is through the computation of scattering ampli89

tudes describing the interactions of winding and momentum states in geometric and nongeometric backgrounds. A first step in this direction was taken in [116], where scattering
amplitudes of closed string tachyons in an R−flux background were computed and a very
interesting non-associative behavior of the spacetime coordinates was found. We shall
review this work in the next Section, but here we point out that an effective field theory
analysis of these kinds of scattering amplitudes, which would give an alternative approach
to this question, is not yet available.
In the absence of a better comprehension, it is important to note that the backgroundfield equations in a particular duality frame are the same as for the usual string. A priori
this does not have to be the case since, as we have seen, the string winding modes could
in principle correct the usual β-functions. Moreover, given that T-duality is corrected by
worldsheet instantons and the doubled space contains the naive T-dual, corrections to the
double geometry could arise. It is then reasonable to expect that once double geometry
is understood, one will be able to elucidate these questions. In this sense, a higher loop
calculation of the β−functionals would be important since the full generalized Riemann
tensor is expected to appear in case the analogy with ordinary string theory goes through.
As a matter of fact, as discussed in Section 4, although a duality covariant generalized
Riemann tensor has been constructed whose contractions give the generalized Ricci tensor
and scalar, it cannot be completely determined from the physical fields of DFT as in
ordinary Riemannian geometry. Better understanding the link between string theory and
DFT might also help to uncover the geometry of the double space.

90

8

Other developments and applications

DFT has proven to be a powerful tool to explore string theoretical features beyond the
supergravity limit and Riemannian geometry. In the past few years there has been a
great deal of progress on these issues, growing largely out of the systematic application of
symmetries and dualities. We certainly do not have a complete understanding of DFT,
but an increasing number of promising directions have opened following the original works
and several encouraging ideas have been put forward. We cannot discuss all of them in
detail here but, besides the topics covered above and by way of conclusion, we would like
to comment on some recent developments and open problems.

8.1

Non-commutative/non-associative structures in closed string
theory

In the presence of a constant two-form field, the coordinates of the end-points of open
strings attached to a D-brane become non-commutative [117]. Moreover, in the background of a non-trivial H−flux, the coordinates are not only non-commutative but also
non-associative [118]. This behavior is revealed by scattering amplitudes of open string
states and usually interpreted as a consequence of the structure of interactions in open
string theory, which involve Riemann surfaces with boundaries. To compute scattering
amplitudes, the vertex operators creating open string states must be inserted on the
boundaries, and then, a background that is sensitive to ordering might distinguish the
insertion points.
In contrast, the sum over world-sheets defining interactions of closed strings, contains
Riemann surfaces with no boundaries, in which the vertex operators are inserted in the
bulk. Therefore, one would not expect to have non-commutative coordinates in closed
string theory because no unambiguous notion of ordering can be defined in scattering
amplitudes. However, it has been argued that in presence of non-geometric fluxes, the
coordinates of closed strings can become non-commutative or even non-associative [119,
120, 116].
91

Actually, non-geometric fluxes twist the Poisson structure of the phase-space of closed
strings and the non-vanishing equal time commutator of closed string coordinates in a
Q−flux background has been conjectured to be given by
I
 i

j
′
lim′ x (τ, σ), x (τ, σ ) =
Qij k dxk ,
σ→σ

(8.1)

Ck

where Ck is a cycle around which the closed string wraps, while non-associativity has been
argued to arise in an R−flux background in which
lim

σ′ ,σ′′ →σ

 i



x (τ, σ), xj (τ, σ ′ ), xk (τ, σ ′′ ) + cyclic = Rijk .

(8.2)

In particular, non-commutativity has been studied in the three dimensional background with Q−flux that is dual to the flat three-torus with H−flux discussed in Sections
5.2 and 5.3. Recall that one can use Buscher’s rules (3.11) to map the flat three-torus with
H−flux to a twisted torus with zero H−flux in which the twist is related to a geometric
flux ω. A further T-duality then yields the non-geometric Q−flux background in which
the metric and two-form are locally but not globally well-defined. In the simple case in
which Ck is a circle and the Q−flux is constant: Qij k = Qǫij k , the commutator (8.1)
becomes



lim′ xi (τ, σ), xj (τ, σ ′ ) = 2πQǫij k p̃k ,

σ→σ

(8.3)

and then we see that non-commutativity is a non-local effect related to winding.
Non-associativity of the string coordinates was first observed in the theory of closed
strings moving on the three-sphere S 3 in the presence of an H−flux background [119]. This
theory is described by the exactly solvable SU(2)k WZW model, and then a conformal
field theory computation can be performed. A non-vanishing equal-time, equal-position
cyclic double commutator of the spacetime coordinates, independent of the world-sheet
coordinates, was found. More recently, a non-trivial cyclic three product was also found
in [116] from the scattering amplitudes of closed string tachyon vertex operators in an
R−flux background. The three tachyon correlator gets a non-trivial phase in R−space
depending on the operators ordering, before enforcing momentum conservation. The nonvanishing cyclic three-bracket of the coordinates appears then to be consistent with the
structure of two-dimensional conformal field theory.
92

The non-associative geometry probed by closed strings in flat non-geometric R−flux
backgrounds has been also studied in [77] from a different perspective. Starting from a
Courant sigma-model on an open membrane, regarded as a topological sector of closed
string dynamics in R−space, the authors derive a twisted Poisson sigma-model on the
boundary of the membrane. For constant R−flux, they obtain closed formulas for the
corresponding non-associative star product and its associator.
Recall that starting from a geometrical background and performing three T-dualities in
these three-dimensional backgrounds, one runs out of isometric directions. In particular,
in the R−flux background, the notion of locality is completely lost in the conventional
space. In DFT instead, the resulting background depends on a dual coordinate, and these
global and local issues can be avoided. Thus, by naturally incorporating all the T-dual
backgrounds in a covariant picture through a double space, DFT provides a convenient
framework for analyzing non-commutativity/non-associativity. Actually, as discussed in
[120], in the doubled phase space T-duality would exchange commutators among the
conventional space-time coordinates with others among the dual ones. If coordinates
commute in the first setting while the duals do not, the situation gets exchanged after
T-duality.

8.2

Large gauge transformations in DFT

While all the results of this review are based on the infinitesimal generalized diffeomorphisms (3.39), finite gauge transformations were considered by O. Hohm and B. Zwiebach
in [121] and J-H. Park in [122] (see also [123]) under the imposition of the strong constraint. They are defined through exponentiations of the generalized Lie derivatives, and
are interpreted as generalized coordinate transformations in the doubled space. In [121],
a formula for large gauge transformations was proposed and tested, which is written in
terms of derivatives of the coordinate maps. Successive generalized coordinate transformations give a generalized coordinate transformation that differs from the direct composition
of the original two: it is constructed using the C-bracket. Interestingly, although these
transformations form a group when acting on fields, they do not associate when acting
93

on coordinates, and then one wonders whether this can be related to the works in [119].
By now, it is not completely known how to construct a non-trivial patching of local
regions of the doubled manifold leading to non-geometric configurations. As we reviewed,
the notion of a T-fold is based on the idea that field configurations on overlaps can be
glued with the use of T-duality transformations. In order to address questions of this type
in double field theory we need a clear picture of the finite gauge transformations. This is
a very interesting line of research.

8.3

New perspectives on α′ corrections

The effective supergravity action is nicely covariantized under the T-duality group and
generalized diffeomorphisms. One can then wonder if a similar covariantization occurs
for the α′ corrections to the action. This question was posed in [29], where a first step
in this direction was given. Specifically, within a generalized metric formulation, it was
shown that the Riemann-squared scalar Rijkl Rijkl , familiar in α′ corrections to the lowenergy effective action of string theory, is not obtained (after the proper implementation
of the strong constraint in the supergravity frame ∂˜i = 0) from any covariant expression
built out of the generalized metric and generalized dilaton (and setting bij = φ = 0), and
quartic in generalized derivatives. For the sake of concreteness, let us be more specific.
This obstruction appears due to a problematic contribution in the expansion, taking the
form g np g iq g kl g mt g rs ∂k gmr ∂i gns ∂q ∂l gpt . It was shown that there is no possible covariant
combination giving rise to a term like this, and the origin of this problem can be traced
back to the O(D, D) structure of the generalized metric.
To understand the significance of this result, suppose one had succeeded in constructing such a covariant combination related to Rijkl Rijkl . Then, one could have written
a general four-derivative action from linear combinations of the squares of the generalized curvatures.

Being constructed from covariant objects, any of them would be

invariant. As argued in [29], this would be unexpected because the field redefinitions
gij → gij + α′ (a1 Rij + a2 gij R) that respect diffeomorphism invariance, map α′ -corrected
actions into each other, and alter the coefficients of Ricci-squared and R-squared terms.
94

After these field redefinitions, the T-duality transformation of gij would be α′ -corrected,
in conflict with the original assumption.
Although things are not as easy as one would have liked them to be, a better understanding of α′ corrections in DFT would help to understand the contributions of the
two-form and dilaton to the corrections, as commented in [124], and also possibly help
to find new patterns, based on duality arguments. Also, a better understanding of this
problem might shed light on the mysterious un-physical components of the generalized
Riemann tensor, and viceversa. In any case, α′ -corrections to supergravity in the context
of DFT seem to be a very promising line of research, where plenty of things remain to be
done and learnt. Soon after this Review appeared, progress in this direction was done in
[125] and [126].

8.4

Geometry for non-geometry

As we have seen, T-duality appears to imply that the geometrical structure underlying
string theory goes beyond the usual framework of differential geometry and suggests an
extension of the standard diffeomorphism group of General Relativity. A new geometrical
framework to describe the non-geometric structures was developed in [65, 70]. The idea
of these works is to provide a general formulation to study non-geometric backgrounds in
conventional higher dimensional space-time, in a formalism that facilitates the treatment
of global issues that are problematic in standard supergravity.
When the generalized metric has the form (3.22), it is said to be in the geometric frame.
A general O(D, D) transformation mixes the usual metric and two-form fields in a complicated way and a (T-duality inspired) field redefinition is convenient to re-parameterize the
generalized metric such that the description of non-geometric backgrounds becomes more
natural (this can be named the non-geometric frame). The field redefinition makes a dual
metric and a bivector β ij enter the game, and these now become the fields of the geometric
action for non-geometric fluxes. Performing these field redefinitions in the supergravity
action (3.17), makes the non-geometric fluxes appear, in such a way that the new actions
are well-defined in terms of the new fields. DFT provides a natural framework to inter95

polate between these two frames, in which geometric and non-geometric backgrounds are
better described.
The new actions can be interpreted as coming from the differential geometry of Lie
algebroids. These are generalizations of Lie algebras where the structure constants can be
space-time dependent. Lie algebroids give a natural generalization of the familiar concepts
of standard Riemannian geometry, such as covariant derivatives, torsion and curvatures.
A detailed account of the relation between these conventional objects and those appearing
for Lie algebroids is presented in [70].
These are very nice results that specialize in the geometry and dynamics of nongeometric backgrounds.

8.5

Beyond supergravity: DFT without strong constraint

As we explained, in order for the generalized Lie derivative to generate closed transformations, the fields and gauge parameters of the theory must be constrained, i.e. DFT is
a restricted theory (3.44). One possibility to solve the constraints is to impose an even
stronger restriction: the strong constraint (3.30). This possibility is the most explored
one, and allows for a generic form of fields and gauge parameters, but with a strong restriction in their coordinate dependence: they can only depend on a (un-doubled) slice
of the double space. This enables a direct relation to supergravity, and puts DFT in a
safe and controlled place. There are however other solutions [66, 67, 34, 53, 54, 55, 30]
in which the shape of the fields is restricted, but not the coordinate dependence, which
can then be truly double. As we extensively reviewed, in this situation the fields adopt
the form of a Scherk-Schwarz reduction ansatz, and this facilitates to make contact with
gauged supergravities in lower dimensions. The double coordinate dependence here is
encoded in the gaugings, which cover the corners of the configuration space that are not
reached from standard supergravity compactifications.
These doubled solutions correspond to the first attempts of consistently going beyond
supergravity in DFT. Whether these extensions live within string theory is a question
that remains unanswered. This seems most likely to be the case, because these extensions
96

are precisely governed by the symmetries of string theory. In any case, DFT provides
a (stringy-based) scenario in which supergravity is only a particular limit, and many
explorations beyond this limit still have to be done.

8.6

(Exotic) brane orbits in DFT

In the open string sector, T-duality exchanges Dirichlet and Neumann boundary conditions, and then relates D-branes with different dimensionalities. This situation was nicely
depicted in the double torus in [127]. After evaluating the one-loop beta function for the
boundary gauge coupling, the effective field theory for the double D-branes was obtained,
and is described by a T-duality covariant DBI action of double fields.
In the NS-NS sector, the NS5-brane and KK5-monopole were also considered in the
double torus [128]. Both configurations are related by T-duality, and the orbit is known
to continue. By applying a further T-duality, one obtains the 522 -brane (see [129, 130]
for detailed discussions) which looks like a T-fold, and is a special case of a Q-brane
[131]. DFT allows to T-dualize further in order to obtain an R-brane. The picture
is analogous to that of duality orbits on non-geometric fluxes. The exotic Q and Rbranes are nicely accommodated in DFT, and the frameworks of [65] and [70] suitably
describe their underlying geometry. Being sources of non-geometric fluxes, they exhibit
an interesting non-associative/non-commutative behavior [131].
The NS5 and KK5 source Bianchi identities on their worldvolumes [132], and their
exotic T-duals are likely to source the corresponding T-dual Bianchi identities for nongeometric fluxes [69]. Interestingly, these Bianchi identities are naturally identified with
the consistency constraints of DFT (3.64).
Brane orbits have been extensively discussed in [133] and [129], and we refer to those
papers for a general discussion on the topic. There are still plenty of unanswered questions,
for example regarding the existence (and validity) of bound states of geometric and nongeometric branes described by configurations that violate the strong constraint. This
exciting area of research is just beginning, and DFT seems to be a suitable framework for
exploration.
97

8.7

New possibilities for upliftings, moduli fixing and dS vacua

Only a subset of all the possible deformations (gaugings or fluxes) in gauged supergravities in four-dimensions can be reached from standard compactifications of D = 10, 11
supergravity, as we explained. The rest of them (the non-geometric orbits) on the other
hand don’t admit supergravity uplifts, and then one has to appeal to duality arguments
in order to make sense of them from a lower dimensional perspective. DFT (and the
more general U-duality covariant frameworks) provide a suitable scenario to uplift nongeometric orbits in an extended geometrical sense [68]. As we explained, non-geometric
fluxes seem to be necessary ingredients in purely flux-based moduli stabilization surveys
[89]. The same happens in dS vacua explorations. Although there is beautiful recent
progress in the quest for classical (meta)stable dS vacua with non-geometric fluxes [89],
their uplift to extended geometry (in particular DFT) or the 10-dimensional geometric
actions for non-geometric fluxes [65, 70] is still an open question.
Once again, DFT seems to provide a suitable framework to uplift the gauged supergravities with non-geometric fluxes that give rise to desired phenomenological features. Progress in this direction was achieved in some particular gauged supergravities
[68] through consistent relaxations of the strong constraint.
Also in this direction, the extended geometry of [55] might shed light on the uplifts
of the new SO(8) maximal supergravities [102], which seem to find obstructions in their
uplift to D = 11 supergravity [103].

9

Acknowledgments

We are very grateful to W. Baron, G. Dibitetto, J. J. Fernandez-Melgarejo, D. Geissbuhler,
M. Grana, V. Penas, D. Roest, A. Rosabal for collaboration in some works covered by this
review. We warmly thank D. Berman, N. Copland, G. Dibitetto, M. Grana, O. Hohm, JH. Park, V. Penas, D. Roest, A. Rosabal and B. Zwiebach for enlightening comments and
corrections to the review. We are also indebted with E. Andres, W. Baron, O. Bedoya, M.
Galante and S. Iguri for helping us to improve the presentation. CN is specially grateful
98

to V. Rivelles for the invitation to write this review. This work was partially supported
by CONICET, UBA and EPLANET.

99

References
[1] W. Siegel, “Superspace duality in low-energy superstrings,” Phys. Rev. D 48 (1993)
2826 [hep-th/9305073].
W. Siegel, “Two vierbein formalism for string inspired axionic gravity,” Phys. Rev.
D 47 (1993) 5453 [hep-th/9302036].
[2] C. Hull and B. Zwiebach, “Double Field Theory,” JHEP 0909 (2009) 099
[arXiv:0904.4664 [hep-th]].
[3] J. Polchinski, “String theory. Vol. 1: An introduction to the bosonic string, Vol. 2:
Superstring theory and beyond,” Cambridge, UK: Univ. Pr. (1998)
M. B. Green, J. H. Schwarz and E. Witten, “Superstring Theory. Vol. 1: Introduction,
Vol. 2: Loop Amplitudes, Anomalies And Phenomenology,” Cambridge, Uk: Univ.
Pr. ( 1987). ( Cambridge Monographs On Mathematical Physics)
K. Becker, M. Becker and J. H. Schwarz, “String theory and M-theory: A modern
introduction,” Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univ. Pr. (2007)
E. Kiritsis, “String theory in a nutshell,” Princeton University Press, 2007
B. Zwiebach, “A first course in string theory,” Cambridge, UK: Univ. Pr. (2009)
L. E. Ibanez and A. M. Uranga, “String theory and particle physics: An introduction
to string phenomenology,” Cambridge, UK: Univ. Pr. (2012)
[4] A. Giveon, M. Porrati and E. Rabinovici, “Target space duality in string theory,”
Phys. Rept. 244 (1994) 77 [hep-th/9401139].
[5] E. Alvarez, L. Alvarez-Gaume and Y. Lozano, “An Introduction to T duality in string
theory,” Nucl. Phys. Proc. Suppl. 41 (1995) 1 [hep-th/9410237].
[6] M. Grana, “Flux compactifications in string theory: A Comprehensive review,” Phys.
Rept. 423 (2006) 91 [hep-th/0509003].
M. R. Douglas and S. Kachru, “Flux compactification,” Rev. Mod. Phys. 79 (2007)
733 [hep-th/0610102].
100

R. Blumenhagen, B. Kors, D. Lust and S. Stieberger, “Four-dimensional String Compactifications with D-Branes, Orientifolds and Fluxes,” Phys. Rept. 445 (2007) 1
[hep-th/0610327].
[7] B. Wecht, “Lectures on Nongeometric Flux Compactifications,” Class. Quant. Grav.
24 (2007) S773 [arXiv:0708.3984 [hep-th]].
D. Andriot, “Non-geometric fluxes versus (non)-geometry,” arXiv:1303.0251 [hep-th].
A. Chatzistavrakidis and L. Jonke, “Generalized fluxes in matrix compactifications,”
arXiv:1305.1864 [hep-th].
[8] H. Samtleben, “Lectures on Gauged Supergravity and Flux Compactifications,”
Class. Quant. Grav. 25 (2008) 214002 [arXiv:0808.4076 [hep-th]].
D. Roest, “M-theory and gauged supergravities,” Fortsch. Phys. 53 (2005) 119
[hep-th/0408175].
[9] O. Hohm, “T-duality versus Gauge Symmetry,” Prog. Theor. Phys. Suppl. 188 (2011)
116 [arXiv:1101.3484 [hep-th]].
B. Zwiebach, “Double Field Theory, T-Duality, and Courant Brackets,” Lect. Notes
Phys. 851 (2012) 265 [arXiv:1109.1782 [hep-th]].
[10] N. Hitchin, “Lectures on generalized geometry,” arXiv:1008.0973 [math.DG].
P. Koerber, “Lectures on Generalized Complex Geometry for Physicists,” Fortsch.
Phys. 59 (2011) 169 [arXiv:1006.1536 [hep-th]].
[11] D. S. Berman and D. C. Thompson, “Duality Symmetric String and M-Theory,”
arXiv:1306.2643 [hep-th].
[12] M. J. Duff, “Duality Rotations In String Theory,” Nucl. Phys. B 335 (1990) 610.
M. J. Duff and J. X. Lu, “Duality Rotations In Membrane Theory,” Nucl. Phys. B
347 (1990) 394.
[13] A. A. Tseytlin, “Duality symmetric string theory and the cosmological constant
problem,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 66 (1991) 545.
101

A. A. Tseytlin, “Duality symmetric closed string theory and interacting chiral
scalars,” Nucl. Phys. B 350 (1991) 395.
A. A. Tseytlin, “Duality Symmetric Formulation Of String World Sheet Dynamics,”
Phys. Lett. B 242 (1990) 163.
[14] C. M. Hull, “A Geometry for non-geometric string backgrounds,” JHEP 0510 (2005)
065 [arXiv:hep-th/0406102].
C. M. Hull, “Doubled Geometry and T-Folds,” JHEP 0707 (2007) 080
[hep-th/0605149].
A. Dabholkar and C. Hull, “Generalised T-duality and non-geometric backgrounds,”
JHEP 0605 (2006) 009 [hep-th/0512005].
C. M. Hull and R. A. Reid-Edwards, “Gauge symmetry, T-duality and doubled geometry,” JHEP 0808 (2008) 043 [arXiv:0711.4818 [hep-th]].
C. M. Hull and R. A. Reid-Edwards, “Non-geometric backgrounds, doubled geometry
and generalised T-duality,” JHEP 0909 (2009) 014 [arXiv:0902.4032 [hep-th]].
C. M. Hull, “Global aspects of T-duality, gauged sigma models and T-folds,” JHEP
0710 (2007) 057 [hep-th/0604178].
[15] T. Kugo and B. Zwiebach, “Target space duality as a symmetry of string field theory,”
Prog. Theor. Phys. 87 (1992) 801 [hep-th/9201040].
B. Zwiebach, “Closed string field theory: Quantum action and the B-V master equation,” Nucl. Phys. B 390 (1993) 33 [hep-th/9206084].
[16] O. Hohm, C. Hull and B. Zwiebach, “Background independent action for double field
theory,” JHEP 1007 (2010) 016 [arXiv:1003.5027 [hep-th]].
[17] O. Hohm, C. Hull and B. Zwiebach, “Generalized metric formulation of double field
theory,” JHEP 1008, 008 (2010) [arXiv:1006.4823 [hep-th]].
[18] O. Hohm and S. K. Kwak, “Frame-like Geometry of Double Field Theory,” J. Phys.
A 44 (2011) 085404 [arXiv:1011.4101 [hep-th]].

102

[19] N. Hitchin, “Generalized Calabi-Yau manifolds,” Quart. J. Math. Oxford Ser. 54
(2003) 281 [math/0209099 [math-dg]].
M. Gualtieri, “Generalized complex geometry,” math/0401221 [math-dg].
[20] M. Grana, R. Minasian, M. Petrini and A. Tomasiello, “Supersymmetric backgrounds
from generalized Calabi-Yau manifolds,” JHEP 0408 (2004) 046 [hep-th/0406137].
M. Grana, R. Minasian, M. Petrini and A. Tomasiello, “Generalized structures of
N=1 vacua,” JHEP 0511 (2005) 020 [hep-th/0505212].
M. Grana, J. Louis and D. Waldram, “Hitchin functionals in N=2 supergravity,”
JHEP 0601 (2006) 008 [hep-th/0505264].
M. Grana, R. Minasian, M. Petrini and A. Tomasiello, “A Scan for new N=1 vacua
on twisted tori,” JHEP 0705 (2007) 031 [hep-th/0609124].
M. Grana, J. Louis and D. Waldram, “SU(3) x SU(3) compactification and mirror
duals of magnetic fluxes,” JHEP 0704 (2007) 101 [hep-th/0612237].
M. Grana, R. Minasian, M. Petrini and D. Waldram, “T-duality, Generalized Geometry and Non-Geometric Backgrounds,” JHEP 0904 (2009) 075 [arXiv:0807.4527
[hep-th]].
L. Martucci and P. Smyth, “Supersymmetric D-branes and calibrations on general
N=1 backgrounds,” JHEP 0511 (2005) 048 [hep-th/0507099].
L. Martucci, “D-branes on general N=1 backgrounds: Superpotentials and D-terms,”
JHEP 0606 (2006) 033 [hep-th/0602129].
P. Koerber and L. Martucci, “Deformations of calibrated D-branes in flux generalized
complex manifolds,” JHEP 0612 (2006) 062 [hep-th/0610044].
P. Koerber and L. Martucci, “From ten to four and back again: How to generalize
the geometry,” JHEP 0708 (2007) 059 [arXiv:0707.1038 [hep-th]].
I. Benmachiche and T. W. Grimm, “Generalized N=1 orientifold compactifications
and the Hitchin functionals,” Nucl. Phys. B 748 (2006) 200 [hep-th/0602241].

103

T. W. Grimm and J. Louis, “The Effective action of type IIA Calabi-Yau orientifolds,” Nucl. Phys. B 718 (2005) 153 [hep-th/0412277].
T. W. Grimm and J. Louis, “The Effective action of N = 1 Calabi-Yau orientifolds,”
Nucl. Phys. B 699 (2004) 387 [hep-th/0403067].
[21] O. Hohm and S. K. Kwak, “Double Field Theory Formulation of Heterotic Strings,”
JHEP 1106 (2011) 096 [arXiv:1103.2136 [hep-th]].
[22] D. Andriot, “Heterotic string from a higher dimensional perspective,” Nucl. Phys. B
855 (2012) 222 [arXiv:1102.1434 [hep-th]].
[23] O. Hohm, S. K. Kwak and B. Zwiebach, “Unification of Type II Strings and Tduality,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 107 (2011) 171603 [arXiv:1106.5452 [hep-th]].
O. Hohm, S. K. Kwak and B. Zwiebach, “Double Field Theory of Type II Strings,”
JHEP 1109 (2011) 013 [arXiv:1107.0008 [hep-th]].
[24] A. Coimbra, C. Strickland-Constable and D. Waldram, “Supergravity as Generalised
Geometry I: Type II Theories,” JHEP 1111 (2011) 091 [arXiv:1107.1733 [hep-th]].
A. Coimbra, C. Strickland-Constable and D. Waldram, “Generalised Geometry and
type II Supergravity,” Fortsch. Phys. 60 (2012) 982 [arXiv:1202.3170 [hep-th]].
[25] I. Jeon, K. Lee and J. -H. Park, “Ramond-Ramond Cohomology and O(D,D) Tduality,” JHEP 1209 (2012) 079 [arXiv:1206.3478 [hep-th]].
[26] O. Hohm and S. K. Kwak, “Massive Type II in Double Field Theory,” JHEP 1111
(2011) 086 [arXiv:1108.4937 [hep-th]].
[27] O. Hohm and S. K. Kwak, “N=1 Supersymmetric Double Field Theory,” JHEP 1203
(2012) 080 [arXiv:1111.7293 [hep-th]].
I. Jeon, K. Lee and J. -H. Park, “Supersymmetric Double Field Theory: Stringy
Reformulation of Supergravity,” Phys. Rev. D 85 (2012) 081501 [Erratum-ibid. D 86
(2012) 089903] [arXiv:1112.0069 [hep-th]].

104

I. Jeon, K. Lee and J. -H. Park, “Incorporation of fermions into double field theory,”
JHEP 1111 (2011) 025 [arXiv:1109.2035 [hep-th]].
[28] I. Jeon, K. Lee and J. -H. Park, “Differential geometry with a projection: Application
to double field theory,” JHEP 1104 (2011) 014 [arXiv:1011.1324 [hep-th]].
I. Jeon, K. Lee and J. -H. Park, “Stringy differential geometry, beyond Riemann,”
Phys. Rev. D 84 (2011) 044022 [arXiv:1105.6294 [hep-th]].
[29] O. Hohm and B. Zwiebach, “On the Riemann Tensor in Double Field Theory,” JHEP
1205 (2012) 126 [arXiv:1112.5296 [hep-th]].
O. Hohm and B. Zwiebach, “Towards an invariant geometry of double field theory,”
arXiv:1212.1736 [hep-th].
[30] D. S. Berman, C. D. A. Blair, E. Malek and M. J. Perry, “The OD,D Geometry of
String Theory,” arXiv:1303.6727 [hep-th].
[31] I. Jeon, K. Lee, J. -H. Park and Y. Suh, “Stringy Unification of Type IIA
and IIB Supergravities under N=2 D=10 Supersymmetric Double Field Theory,”
arXiv:1210.5078 [hep-th].
[32] S. K. Kwak, “Invariances and Equations of Motion in Double Field Theory,” JHEP
1010 (2010) 047 [arXiv:1008.2746 [hep-th]].
[33] C. Hull and B. Zwiebach, “The Gauge algebra of double field theory and Courant
brackets,” JHEP 0909 (2009) 090 [arXiv:0908.1792 [hep-th]].
[34] M. Grana and D. Marques, “Gauged Double Field Theory,” JHEP 1204 (2012) 020
[arXiv:1201.2924 [hep-th]].
[35] D. S. Berman and N. B. Copland, “The string partition function in Hull’s doubled
formalism,” Phys. Lett. B 649 (2007) 325 [arXiv:hep-th/0701080].
[36] D. S. Berman, N. B. Copland and D. C. Thompson, “Background Field Equations
for the Duality Symmetric String,” Nucl. Phys. B 791 (2008) 175 [arXiv:0708.2267
[hep-th]].
105

D. S. Berman and D. C. Thompson, “Duality Symmetric Strings, Dilatons and O(d,d)
Effective Actions,” Phys. Lett. B 662 (2008) 279 [arXiv:0712.1121 [hep-th]].
N. B. Copland, “Connecting T-duality invariant theories,” Nucl. Phys. B 854 (2012)
575 [arXiv:1106.1888 [hep-th]].
D.

C.

Thompson,

“T-duality

Invariant

Approaches

to

String

Theory,”

arXiv:1012.4393 [hep-th].
[37] N. B. Copland, “A Double Sigma Model for Double Field Theory,” JHEP 1204
(2012) 044 [arXiv:1111.1828 [hep-th]].
[38] C. M. Hull, “Generalised Geometry for M-Theory,” JHEP 0707 (2007) 079
[hep-th/0701203].
[39] P. P. Pacheco and D. Waldram, “M-theory, exceptional generalised geometry and
superpotentials,” JHEP 0809 (2008) 123 [arXiv:0804.1362 [hep-th]].
[40] D. S. Berman and M. J. Perry, “Generalized Geometry and M theory,” JHEP 1106
(2011) 074 [arXiv:1008.1763 [hep-th]].
[41] P. C. West, “E(11) and M theory,” Class. Quant. Grav. 18 (2001) 4443
[hep-th/0104081].
F. Riccioni and P. C. West, “The E(11) origin of all maximal supergravities,” JHEP
0707 (2007) 063 [arXiv:0705.0752 [hep-th]].
F. Riccioni and P. C. West, “E(11)-extended spacetime and gauged supergravities,”
JHEP 0802 (2008) 039 [arXiv:0712.1795 [hep-th]].
F. Riccioni, D. Steele and P. West, “The E(11) origin of all maximal supergravities:
The Hierarchy of field-strengths,” JHEP 0909 (2009) 095 [arXiv:0906.1177 [hep-th]].
P. West, “Generalised geometry, eleven dimensions and E11,” arXiv:1111.1642 [hepth].
[42] K. Koepsell, H. Nicolai and H. Samtleben, “An Exceptional geometry for D = 11
supergravity?,” Class. Quant. Grav. 17 (2000) 3689 [hep-th/0006034].
106

[43] C. Hillmann, “Generalized E(7(7)) coset dynamics and D=11 supergravity,” JHEP
0903 (2009) 135 [arXiv:0901.1581 [hep-th]].
[44] A. Coimbra, C. Strickland-Constable and D. Waldram, “Supergravity as Generalised
Geometry II: Ed(d) × R+ and M theory,” arXiv:1212.1586 [hep-th].
A. Coimbra, C. Strickland-Constable and D. Waldram, “Ed(d) × R+ Generalised Geometry, Connections and M theory,” arXiv:1112.3989 [hep-th].
[45] D. S. Berman, M. Cederwall, A. Kleinschmidt and D. C. Thompson, “The gauge
structure of generalised diffeomorphisms,” JHEP 1301 (2013) 064 [arXiv:1208.5884
[hep-th]].
[46] D. S. Berman, H. Godazgar, M. J. Perry and P. West, “Duality Invariant Actions
and Generalised Geometry,” JHEP 1202 (2012) 108 [arXiv:1111.0459 [hep-th]].
D. S. Berman, H. Godazgar and M. J. Perry, “SO(5,5) duality in M-theory and
generalized geometry,” Phys.Lett. B700 (2011) 65-67 [arXiv:1103.5733 [hep-th]]
[47] D. S. Berman, H. Godazgar, M. Godazgar and M. J. Perry, “The Local symmetries
of M-theory and their formulation in generalised geometry,” JHEP 1201 (2012) 012
[arXiv:1110.3930 [hep-th]].
[48] D. C. Thompson, “Duality Invariance: From M-theory to Double Field Theory,”
JHEP 1108 (2011) 125 [arXiv:1106.4036 [hep-th]].
[49] J. -H. Park and Y. Suh, “U-geometry : SL(5),” arXiv:1302.1652 [hep-th].
[50] M. Cederwall, J. Edlund and A. Karlsson, “Exceptional geometry and tensor fields,”
arXiv:1302.6736 [hep-th].
M. Cederwall, “Non-gravitational exceptional supermultiplets,” arXiv:1302.6737
[hep-th].
[51] H. Godazgar, M. Godazgar and M. J. Perry, “E8 duality and dual gravity,”
arXiv:1303.2035 [hep-th].

107

[52] G. Aldazabal, E. Andres, P. G. Camara and M. Grana, “U-dual fluxes and Generalized Geometry,” JHEP 1011 (2010) 083 [arXiv:1007.5509 [hep-th]].
[53] D. S. Berman, E. T. Musaev, D. C. Thompson and D. C. Thompson, “Duality
Invariant M-theory: Gauged supergravities and Scherk-Schwarz reductions,” JHEP
1210 (2012) 174 [arXiv:1208.0020 [hep-th]].
[54] E. T. Musaev, “Gauged supergravities in 5 and 6 dimensions from generalised ScherkSchwarz reductions,” arXiv:1301.0467 [hep-th].
[55] G. Aldazabal, M. Grana, D. Marques and J. A. Rosabal, “Extended geometry and
gauged maximal supergravity,” arXiv:1302.5419 [hep-th].
[56] K. Dasgupta, G. Rajesh and S. Sethi, “M theory, orientifolds and G - flux,” JHEP
9908 (1999) 023 [hep-th/9908088].
[57] S. Kachru, M. B. Schulz, P. K. Tripathy and S. P. Trivedi, “New supersymmetric
string compactifications,” JHEP 0303 (2003) 061 [hep-th/0211182].
[58] S. Hellerman, J. McGreevy and B. Williams, “Geometric constructions of nongeometric string theories,” JHEP 0401 (2004) 024 [hep-th/0208174].
[59] A. Dabholkar and C. Hull, “Duality twists, orbifolds, and fluxes,” JHEP 0309 (2003)
054 [hep-th/0210209].
[60] J. Shelton, W. Taylor and B. Wecht, “Nongeometric flux compactifications,” JHEP
0510 (2005) 085, hep-th/0508133.
[61] A. Flournoy, B. Wecht and B. Williams, “Constructing nongeometric vacua in string
theory,” Nucl. Phys. B 706 (2005) 127 [hep-th/0404217].
A. Flournoy and B. Williams, “Nongeometry, duality twists, and the worldsheet,”
JHEP 0601 (2006) 166 [hep-th/0511126].
A. Lawrence, M. B. Schulz and B. Wecht, “D-branes in nongeometric backgrounds,”
JHEP 0607 (2006) 038 [hep-th/0602025].

108

W. Schulgin and J. Troost, “Backreacted T-folds and non-geometric regions in configuration space,” JHEP 0812 (2008) 098 [arXiv:0808.1345 [hep-th]].
F. Marchesano and W. Schulgin, “Non-geometric fluxes as supergravity backgrounds,” Phys. Rev. D 76 (2007) 041901 [arXiv:0704.3272 [hep-th]].
K. Becker and S. Sethi, “Torsional Heterotic Geometries,” Nucl. Phys. B 820 (2009)
1 [arXiv:0903.3769 [hep-th]].
J. McOrist, D. R. Morrison and S. Sethi, “Geometries, Non-Geometries, and Fluxes,”
Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 14 (2010) [arXiv:1004.5447 [hep-th]].
[62] G. Aldazabal, P. G. Camara, A. Font and L. E. Ibanez, “More dual fluxes and moduli
fixing,” JHEP 0605, 070 (2006) [arXiv:hep-th/0602089].
[63] G. Dall’Agata, N. Prezas, H. Samtleben and M. Trigiante, “Gauged Supergravities
from Twisted Doubled Tori and Non-Geometric String Backgrounds,” Nucl. Phys. B
799 (2008) 80 [arXiv:0712.1026 [hep-th]].
[64] E. Hackett-Jones and G. Moutsopoulos, “Quantum mechanics of the doubled torus,”
JHEP 0610 (2006) 062 [hep-th/0605114].
[65] D. Andriot, O. Hohm, M. Larfors, D. Lust and P. Patalong, “Non-Geometric
Fluxes in Supergravity and Double Field Theory,” Fortsch. Phys. 60 (2012) 1150
[arXiv:1204.1979 [hep-th]].
D. Andriot, O. Hohm, M. Larfors, D. Lust and P. Patalong, “A geometric action for
non-geometric fluxes,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 108 (2012) 261602 [arXiv:1202.3060 [hepth]].
D. Andriot, M. Larfors, D. Lust and P. Patalong, “A ten-dimensional action for
non-geometric fluxes,” JHEP 1109 (2011) 134 [arXiv:1106.4015 [hep-th]].
D. Andriot and A. Betz, “beta-supergravity: a ten-dimensional theory with nongeometric fluxes, and its geometric framework,” arXiv:1306.4381 [hep-th].

109

[66] G. Aldazabal, W. Baron, D. Marques and C. Nunez, “The effective action of
Double Field Theory,” JHEP 1111 (2011) 052 [Erratum-ibid. 1111 (2011) 109]
[arXiv:1109.0290 [hep-th]].
[67] D. Geissbuhler, “Double Field Theory and N=4 Gauged Supergravity,” JHEP 1111
(2011) 116 [arXiv:1109.4280 [hep-th]].
[68] G. Dibitetto, J. J. Fernandez-Melgarejo, D. Marques and D. Roest, “Duality orbits
of non-geometric fluxes,” Fortsch. Phys. 60 (2012) 1123 [arXiv:1203.6562 [hep-th]].
[69] D. Geissbuhler, D. Marques, C. Nunez and V. Penas, “Exploring Double Field Theory,” arXiv:1304.1472 [hep-th].
[70] R. Blumenhagen, A. Deser, E. Plauschinn, F. Rennecke and C. Schmid, “The Intriguing Structure of Non-geometric Frames in String Theory,” arXiv:1304.2784 [hep-th].
R. Blumenhagen, A. Deser, E. Plauschinn and F. Rennecke, “Non-geometric strings,
symplectic gravity and differential geometry of Lie algebroids,” JHEP 1302 (2013)
122 [arXiv:1211.0030 [hep-th]].
R. Blumenhagen, A. Deser, E. Plauschinn and F. Rennecke, “A bi-invariant
Einstein-Hilbert action for the non-geometric string,” Phys. Lett. B 720 (2013) 215
[arXiv:1210.1591 [hep-th]].
[71] D. S. Berman and K. Lee, “Supersymmetry for Gauged Double Field Theory and
Generalised Scherk-Schwarz Reductions,” arXiv:1305.2747 [hep-th].
[72] R. Blumenhagen, X. Gao, D. Herschmann and P. Shukla, “Dimensional Oxidation
of Non-geometric Fluxes in Type II Orientifolds,” arXiv:1306.2761 [hep-th].
[73] O. Hohm and H. Samtleben, “Gauge theory of Kaluza-Klein and winding modes,”
arXiv:1307.0039 [hep-th].
[74] C. Condeescu, I. Florakis, C. Kounnas and D. Lust, “Gauged supergravities and nongeometric Q/R-fluxes from asymmetric orbifold CFT’s,” arXiv:1307.0999 [hep-th].

110

[75] G. Dall’Agata and N. Prezas, “Worldsheet theories for non-geometric string backgrounds,” JHEP 0808 (2008) 088 [arXiv:0806.2003 [hep-th]].
S. D. Avramis, J. -P. Derendinger and N. Prezas, “Conformal chiral boson models
on twisted doubled tori and non-geometric string vacua,” Nucl. Phys. B 827 (2010)
281 [arXiv:0910.0431 [hep-th]].
[76] N. Halmagyi, “Non-geometric String Backgrounds and Worldsheet Algebras,” JHEP
0807 (2008) 137 [arXiv:0805.4571 [hep-th]].
N. Halmagyi, “Non-geometric Backgrounds and the First Order String Sigma Model,”
arXiv:0906.2891 [hep-th].
[77] D. Mylonas, P. Schupp and R. J. Szabo, “Membrane Sigma-Models and Quantization
of Non-Geometric Flux Backgrounds,” JHEP 1209 (2012) 012 [arXiv:1207.0926 [hepth]].
[78] I. Jeon, K. Lee and J. -H. Park, “Double field formulation of Yang-Mills theory,”
Phys. Lett. B 701 (2011) 260 [arXiv:1102.0419 [hep-th]].
O. Hohm, “On factorizations in perturbative quantum gravity,” JHEP 1104 (2011)
103 [arXiv:1103.0032 [hep-th]].
I. Vaisman, “On the geometry of double field theory,” J. Math. Phys. 53 (2012)
033509 [arXiv:1203.0836 [math.DG]].
I. Vaisman, “Towards a double field theory on para-Hermitian manifolds,”
arXiv:1209.0152 [math.DG].
E. Malek, “U-duality in three and four dimensions,” arXiv:1205.6403 [hep-th].
E. Malek, “Timelike U-dualities in Generalised Geometry,” arXiv:1301.0543 [hep-th].
A. Chatzistavrakidis and L. Jonke, “Matrix theory origins of non-geometric fluxes,”
JHEP 1302 (2013) 040 [arXiv:1207.6412 [hep-th]].
M. P. Garcia del Moral, “Dualities as symmetries of the Supermembrane Theory,”
arXiv:1211.6265 [hep-th].

111

M. P. Garcia del Moral, J. Pena and A. Restuccia, “T-duality Invariance of the
Supermembrane,” arXiv:1211.2434 [hep-th].
J. Maharana, “The Worldsheet Perspective of T-duality Symmetry in String Theory,”
Invited Review article for Int. Journal of Mod. Phys. A 2013 [arXiv:1302.1719 [hepth]].
J. Maharana, “Duality Symmetry of String Theory: A Worldsheet Perspective,”
Phys. Lett. B 695 (2011) 370 [arXiv:1010.1727 [hep-th]].
J. Maharana, “T-duality of NSR superstring: The worldsheet perspective,” Int. J.
Mod. Phys. A 27 (2012) 1250140 [arXiv:1203.3357 [hep-th]].
M. Aldi and R. Heluani,

“Dilogarithms,

OPE and twisted T-duality,”

arXiv:1105.4280 [math-ph].
M. B. Schulz, “T-folds, doubled geometry, and the SU(2) WZW model,” JHEP 1206
(2012) 158 [arXiv:1106.6291 [hep-th]].
N. Kan, K. Kobayashi and K. Shiraishi, “Equations of Motion in Double Field Theory: From particles to scale factors,” Phys. Rev. D 84 (2011) 124049 [arXiv:1108.5795
[hep-th]].
D. S. Berman, E. T. Musaev and M. J. Perry, “Boundary Terms in Generalized
Geometry and doubled field theory,” Phys. Lett. B 706 (2011) 228 [arXiv:1110.3097
[hep-th]].
I. Bakhmatov, “Fermionic T-duality and U-duality in type II supergravity,”
arXiv:1112.1983 [hep-th].
M. Hatsuda and T. Kimura, “Canonical approach to Courant brackets for D-branes,”
JHEP 1206 (2012) 034 [arXiv:1203.5499 [hep-th]].
M. Hatsuda and K. Kamimura, “SL(5) duality from canonical M2-brane,” JHEP
1211 (2012) 001 [arXiv:1208.1232 [hep-th]].
N. B. Copland, S. M. Ko and J. -H. Park, “Superconformal Yang-Mills quantum
mechanics and Calogero model with OSp(N—2,R) symmetry,” JHEP 1207 (2012)
076 [arXiv:1205.3869 [hep-th]].
112

T. Kimura and S. Sasaki, “Gauged Linear Sigma Model for Exotic Five-brane,”
arXiv:1304.4061 [hep-th].
M. Hatsuda and K. Kamimura, “M5 algebra and SO(5,5) duality,” arXiv:1305.2258
[hep-th].
H. Wu and H. Yang, “Double Field Theory Inspired Cosmology,” arXiv:1307.0159
[hep-th].
[79] G. Itsios, C. Nunez, K. Sfetsos and D. C. Thompson, “On Non-Abelian T-Duality
and new N=1 backgrounds,” Phys. Lett. B 721 (2013) 342 [arXiv:1212.4840 [hep-th]].
G. Itsios, C. Nunez, K. Sfetsos and D. C. Thompson, “Non-Abelian T-duality and
the AdS/CFT correspondence:new N=1 backgrounds,” arXiv:1301.6755 [hep-th].
G. Itsios, Y. Lozano, E. .O Colgain and K. Sfetsos, “Non-Abelian T-duality and consistent truncations in type-II supergravity,” JHEP 1208 (2012) 132 [arXiv:1205.2274
[hep-th]].
Y. Lozano, E. .O Colgain, K. Sfetsos and D. C. Thompson, “Non-abelian T-duality,
Ramond Fields and Coset Geometries,” JHEP 1106 (2011) 106 [arXiv:1104.5196
[hep-th]].
[80] A. Giveon, E. Rabinovici and G. Veneziano, “Duality in String Background Space,”
Nucl. Phys. B 322 (1989) 167.
[81] J. Maharana and J. H. Schwarz, “Noncompact symmetries in string theory,” Nucl.
Phys. B 390 (1993) 3 [hep-th/9207016].
[82] T. Buscher, “A Symmetry of the String Background Field Equations,” Phys. Lett.
194B (1987) 59.
[83] T. Buscher, “Path Integral Derivation of Quantum Duality in Nonlinear Sigma Models,” Phys. Lett. 201B (1988) 466.
[84] T. Courant, “Dirac Manifolds.” Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 319: 631-661, 1990.
D. Roytenberg, “Courant algebroids, derived brackets and even symplectic supermanifolds”, Ph.D. Thesis, U.C. Berkeley, arXiv:math/9910078.
113

[85] J. Schon and M. Weidner, “Gauged N=4 supergravities,” JHEP 0605 (2006) 034
[hep-th/0602024].
[86] J. Scherk and J. H. Schwarz, “Spontaneous Breaking of Supersymmetry Through
Dimensional Reduction,” Phys. Lett. B 82 (1979) 60.
J. Scherk and J. H. Schwarz, “How to Get Masses from Extra Dimensions,” Nucl.
Phys. B 153, 61 (1979).
[87] N. Kaloper and R. C. Myers, “The Odd story of massive supergravity,” JHEP 9905
(1999) 010 [hep-th/9901045].
[88] M. Grana, R. Minasian, H. Triendl and T. Van Riet, “The moduli problem in ScherkSchwarz compactifications,” arXiv:1305.0785 [hep-th].
[89] U. H. Danielsson, G. Shiu, T. Van Riet and T. Wrase, “A note on obstinate tachyons
in classical dS solutions,” arXiv:1212.5178 [hep-th].
U. Danielsson and G. Dibitetto, “On the distribution of stable de Sitter vacua,”
JHEP 1303 (2013) 018 [arXiv:1212.4984 [hep-th]].
J. Blaback, U. Danielsson and G. Dibitetto, “Fully stable dS vacua from generalised
fluxes,” arXiv:1301.7073 [hep-th].
C. Damian and O. Loaiza-Brito, “More stable dS vacua from S-dual non-geometric
fluxes,” arXiv:1304.0792 [hep-th].
C. Damian, O. Loaiza-Brito, L. Rey and M. Sabido, “Slow-Roll Inflation in Nongeometric Flux Compactification,” arXiv:1302.0529 [hep-th].
B. de Carlos, A. Guarino and J. M. Moreno, “Flux moduli stabilisation, Supergravity
algebras and no-go theorems,” JHEP 1001 (2010) 012 [arXiv:0907.5580 [hep-th]].
B. de Carlos, A. Guarino and J. M. Moreno, “Complete classification of Minkowski
vacua in generalised flux models,” JHEP 1002 (2010) 076 [arXiv:0911.2876 [hep-th]].
J. Shelton, W. Taylor and B. Wecht, “Generalized Flux Vacua,” JHEP 0702 (2007)
095 [hep-th/0607015].

114

A. Micu, E. Palti and G. Tasinato, “Towards Minkowski Vacua in Type II String
Compactifications,” JHEP 0703 (2007) 104 [hep-th/0701173].
E. Palti, “Low Energy Supersymmetry from Non-Geometry,” JHEP 0710 (2007) 011
[arXiv:0707.1595 [hep-th]].
K. Becker, M. Becker, C. Vafa and J. Walcher, “Moduli Stabilization in NonGeometric Backgrounds,” Nucl. Phys. B 770 (2007) 1 [hep-th/0611001].
[90] C. M. Hull and R. A. Reid-Edwards, “Flux compactifications of M-theory on twisted
Tori,” JHEP 0610 (2006) 086 [hep-th/0603094].
C. M. Hull and R. A. Reid-Edwards, “Flux compactifications of string theory on
twisted tori,” Fortsch. Phys. 57 (2009) 862 [hep-th/0503114].
R. A. Reid-Edwards, “Flux compactifications, twisted tori and doubled geometry,”
JHEP 0906, 085 (2009) [arXiv:0904.0380 [hep-th]].
G. Dall’Agata and S. Ferrara, “Gauged supergravity algebras from twisted tori compactifications with fluxes,” Nucl. Phys. B 717 (2005) 223 [hep-th/0502066].
G. Aldazabal, P. G. Camara and J. A. Rosabal, “Flux algebra, Bianchi identities and
Freed-Witten anomalies in F-theory compactifications,” Nucl. Phys. B 814 (2009)
21 [arXiv:0811.2900 [hep-th]].
G. Dall’Agata, G. Villadoro and F. Zwirner, “Type-IIA flux compactifications and
N=4 gauged supergravities,” JHEP 0908 (2009) 018 [arXiv:0906.0370 [hep-th]].
L. Andrianopoli, M. A. Lledo and M. Trigiante, “The Scherk-Schwarz mechanism as a flux compactification with internal torsion,” JHEP 0505 (2005) 051
[hep-th/0502083].
G. Villadoro and F. Zwirner, “N=1 effective potential from dual type-IIA D6/O6
orientifolds with general fluxes,” JHEP 0506 (2005) 047 [hep-th/0503169].
J. -P. Derendinger, C. Kounnas, P. M. Petropoulos and F. Zwirner, “Superpotentials in IIA compactifications with general fluxes,” Nucl. Phys. B 715 (2005) 211
[hep-th/0411276].

115

D. A. Lowe, H. Nastase and S. Ramgoolam, “Massive IIA string theory and matrix
theory compactification,” Nucl. Phys. B 667 (2003) 55 [hep-th/0303173].
D. Andriot, R. Minasian and M. Petrini, “Flux backgrounds from Twists,” JHEP
0912 (2009) 028 [arXiv:0903.0633 [hep-th]].
R. A. Reid-Edwards, “Geometric and non-geometric compactifications of IIB supergravity,” JHEP 0812 (2008) 043 [hep-th/0610263].
R. A. Reid-Edwards and B. Spanjaard, “N=4 Gauged Supergravity from DualityTwist Compactifications of String Theory,” JHEP 0812 (2008) 052 [arXiv:0810.4699
[hep-th]].
A. Chatzistavrakidis and L. Jonke, “Matrix theory compactifications on twisted tori,”
Phys. Rev. D 85 (2012) 106013 [arXiv:1202.4310 [hep-th]].
[91] J. -P. Derendinger, P. M. Petropoulos and N. Prezas, “Axionic symmetry gaugings in
N=4 supergravities and their higher-dimensional origin,” Nucl. Phys. B 785 (2007)
115 [arXiv:0705.0008 [hep-th]].
[92] G. Dibitetto, A. Guarino and D. Roest, “How to halve maximal supergravity,” JHEP
1106, 030 (2011) [arXiv:1104.3587 [hep-th]].
G. Dibitetto, A. Guarino and D. Roest, “Exceptional Flux Compactifications,” JHEP
1205 (2012) 056 [arXiv:1202.0770 [hep-th]].
G. Aldazabal, D. Marques, C. Nunez and J. A. Rosabal, “On Type IIB moduli stabilization and N = 4, 8 supergravities,” Nucl. Phys. B 849, 80 (2011) [arXiv:1101.5954
[hep-th]].
[93] R. Blumenhagen, A. Deser, E. Plauschinn and F. Rennecke, “Bianchi Identities for
Non-Geometric Fluxes - From Quasi-Poisson Structures to Courant Algebroids,”
arXiv:1205.1522 [hep-th].
R. Blumenhagen, A. Deser, E. Plauschinn and F. Rennecke, “Palatini-LovelockCartan Gravity - Bianchi Identities for Stringy Fluxes,” Class. Quant. Grav. 29
(2012) 135004 [arXiv:1202.4934 [hep-th]].
116

[94] C. M. Hull and P. K. Townsend, “Unity of superstring dualities,” Nucl. Phys. B 438
(1995) 109 [hep-th/9410167].
[95] E. Cremmer, B. Julia, H. Lu and C. N. Pope, “Dualization of dualities. 1.,” Nucl.
Phys. B 523 (1998) 73 [hep-th/9710119].
[96] N. A. Obers and B. Pioline, “U duality and M theory,” Phys. Rept. 318 (1999) 113
[hep-th/9809039].
[97] B. de Wit, H. Samtleben and M. Trigiante, “The Maximal D=4 supergravities,”
JHEP 0706 (2007) 049 [arXiv:0705.2101 [hep-th]].
[98] B. de Wit and H. Nicolai, “N=8 Supergravity,” Nucl. Phys. B 208 (1982) 323.
[99] B. de Wit, H. Samtleben and M. Trigiante, “On Lagrangians and gaugings of maximal
supergravities,” Nucl. Phys. B 655 (2003) 93 [hep-th/0212239].
[100] A. Le Diffon and H. Samtleben, “Supergravities without an Action: Gauging the
Trombone,” Nucl. Phys. B 811 (2009) 1 [arXiv:0809.5180 [hep-th]].
A. Le Diffon, H. Samtleben and M. Trigiante, “N=8 Supergravity with Local Scaling
Symmetry,” JHEP 1104 (2011) 079 [arXiv:1103.2785 [hep-th]].
[101] B. de Wit, H. Nicolai and H. Samtleben, “Gauged Supergravities, Tensor Hierarchies, and M-Theory,” JHEP 0802 (2008) 044 [arXiv:0801.1294 [hep-th]].
B. de Wit and H. Samtleben, “The End of the p-form hierarchy,” JHEP 0808 (2008)
015 [arXiv:0805.4767 [hep-th]].
J. Palmkvist, “The tensor hierarchy algebra,” arXiv:1305.0018 [hep-th].
[102] G. Dall’Agata, G. Inverso and M. Trigiante, “Evidence for a family of SO(8) gauged
supergravity theories,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 109 (2012) 201301 [arXiv:1209.0760 [hepth]].
[103] B. de Wit and H. Nicolai, “Deformations of gauged SO(8) supergravity and supergravity in eleven dimensions,” arXiv:1302.6219 [hep-th].

117

[104] O. Hohm and H. Samtleben, “U-duality covariant gravity,” arXiv:1307.0509 [hepth].
O. Hohm and H. Samtleben, “Exceptional Form of D=11 Supergravity,”
arXiv:1308.1673 [hep-th].
[105] W. Siegel, “Covariantly Second Quantized String,” Phys. Lett. B 142 (1984) 276.
[106] M. Rocek and E. P. Verlinde, “Duality, quotients, and currents,” Nucl. Phys. B
373, 630 (1992) [hep-th/9110053].
[107] B. E. Fridling and A. Jevicki, “Dual Representations and Ultraviolet Divergences
in Nonlinear sigma Models,” Phys. Lett. B 134 (1984) 70.
[108] K. Sfetsos, “Canonical equivalence of non-isometric sigma-models and Poisson-Lie”,
Nucl. Phys. B 517 (1998) 549 [arXiv:hep-th/9710163].
E. Alvarez, L. Alvarez-Gaume and Y. Lozano, “A Canonical approach to duality
transformations,” Phys. Lett. B 336 (1994) 183 [hep-th/9406206].
Y. Lozano, “NonAbelian duality and canonical transformations,” Phys. Lett. B 355,
165 (1995) [arXiv:hep-th/9503045].
Y. Lozano, “Duality and canonical transformations,” Mod. Phys. Lett. A 11, 2893
(1996) [arXiv:hepth/ 9610024].
[109] R. Floreanini and R. Jackiw, “Selfdual Fields as Charge Density Solitons,” Phys.
Rev. Lett. 59 (1987) 1873.
M. Henneaux and C. Teitelboim, “Dynamics Of Chiral (selfdual) P Forms,” Phys.
Lett. B 206 (1988) 650.
[110] J. H. Schwarz and A. Sen, “Duality symmetric actions,” Nucl. Phys. B 411, 35
(1994) [hep-th/9304154].
[111] M. Rocek and A. A. Tseytlin, “Partial breaking of global D = 4 supersymmetry,
constrained superfields, and three-brane actions,” Phys. Rev. D 59, 106001 (1999)
[hep-th/9811232].
118

[112] S. Groot Nibbelink and P. Patalong, “A Lorentz invariant doubled worldsheet theory,” Phys. Rev. D 87 (2013) 041902 [arXiv:1207.6110 [hep-th]].
[113] K. Sfetsos, K. Siampos and D. C. Thompson, “Renormalization of Lorentz
non-invariant actions and manifest T-duality,” Nucl. Phys. B 827, 545 (2010)
[arXiv:0910.1345 [hep-th]].
[114] C. Klimcik and P. Severa, “Poisson-Lie T duality and loop groups of Drinfeld doubles,” Phys. Lett. B 372, 65 (1996) [hep-th/9512040].
[115] R. A. Reid-Edwards, “Bi-Algebras, Generalised Geometry and T-Duality,”
arXiv:1001.2479 [hep-th].
[116] R. Blumenhagen, A. Deser, D. Lust, E. Plauschinn and F. Rennecke, “Nongeometric Fluxes, Asymmetric Strings and Nonassociative Geometry,” J. Phys. A
44, 385401 (2011) [arXiv:1106.0316 [hep-th]].
[117] C. -S. Chu and P. -M. Ho, “Noncommutative open string and D-brane,” Nucl. Phys.
B 550, 151 (1999) [hep-th/9812219].
V. Schomerus, “D-branes and deformation quantization,” JHEP 9906, 030 (1999)
[hep-th/9903205].
N. Seiberg and E. Witten, “String theory and noncommutative geometry,” JHEP
9909, 032 (1999) [hep-th/9908142].
F. Ardalan, H. Arfaei and M. M. Sheikh-Jabbari, “Mixed branes and M(atrix) theory
on noncommutative torus,” hep-th/9803067.
[118] M. Herbst, A. Kling and M. Kreuzer, “Star products from open strings in curved
backgrounds,” JHEP 0109, 014 (2001) [hep-th/0106159].
M. Herbst, A. Kling and M. Kreuzer, “Noncommutative tachyon action and D-brane
geometry,” JHEP 0208, 010 (2002) [hep-th/0203077].
L. Cornalba and R. Schiappa, “Nonassociative star product deformations for Dbrane world volumes in curved backgrounds,” Commun. Math. Phys. 225, 33 (2002)
[hep-th/0101219].
119

[119] R. Blumenhagen and E. Plauschinn, “Nonassociative Gravity in String Theory?,”
J. Phys. A 44, 015401 (2011) [arXiv:1010.1263 [hep-th]].
R. Blumenhagen, “Nonassociativity in String Theory,” arXiv:1112.4611 [hep-th].
E. Plauschinn, “Non-geometric fluxes and non-associative geometry,” PoS CORFU
2011, 061 (2011) [arXiv:1203.6203 [hep-th]].
[120] D. Lust, “T-duality and closed string non-commutative (doubled) geometry,” JHEP
1012, 084 (2010) [arXiv:1010.1361 [hep-th]].
C. Condeescu, I. Florakis and D. Lust, “Asymmetric Orbifolds, Non-Geometric
Fluxes and Non-Commutativity in Closed String Theory,” JHEP 1204, 121 (2012)
[arXiv:1202.6366 [hep-th]].
D. Lust, “Twisted Poisson Structures and Non-commutative/non-associative Closed
String Geometry,” PoS CORFU 2011, 086 (2011) [arXiv:1205.0100 [hep-th]].
D. Andriot, M. Larfors, D. Lust and P. Patalong, “(Non-)commutative closed string
on T-dual toroidal backgrounds,” arXiv:1211.6437 [hep-th].
[121] O. Hohm and B. Zwiebach, “Large Gauge Transformations in Double Field Theory,”
JHEP 1302, 075 (2013) [arXiv:1207.4198 [hep-th]].
[122] J. -H. Park,

“Comments on double field theory and diffeomorphism,”

arXiv:1304.5946 [hep-th].
[123] K. Lee and J. -H. Park, “Covariant action for a string in doubled yet gauged spacetime,” arXiv:1307.8377 [hep-th].
[124] M. R. Garousi, “On Riemann curvature corrections to type II supergravity,”
arXiv:1303.4034 [hep-th].
M. R. Garousi, “Ricci curvature corrections to type II supergravity,” Phys. Rev. D
87 (2013) 025006 [arXiv:1210.4379 [hep-th]].
M. R. Garousi, “T-duality of the Riemann curvature corrections to supergravity,”
Phys. Lett. B 718 (2013) 1481 [arXiv:1208.4459 [hep-th]].

120

[125] O. Hohm, W. Siegel and B. Zwiebach, “Doubled alpha’-Geometry,” arXiv:1306.2970
[hep-th].
[126] H. Godazgar and M. Godazgar, “Duality completion of higher derivative corrections,” arXiv:1306.4918 [hep-th].
[127] C. Albertsson, T. Kimura and R. A. Reid-Edwards, “D-branes and doubled geometry,” JHEP 0904 (2009) 113 [arXiv:0806.1783 [hep-th]].
C. Albertsson, S. -H. Dai, P. -W. Kao and F. -L. Lin, “Double Field Theory for
Double D-branes,” JHEP 1109 (2011) 025 [arXiv:1107.0876 [hep-th]].
[128] S. Jensen, “The KK-Monopole/NS5-Brane in Doubled Geometry,” JHEP 1107
(2011) 088 [arXiv:1106.1174 [hep-th]].
[129] J. de Boer and M. Shigemori, “Exotic branes and non-geometric backgrounds,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 104 (2010) 251603 [arXiv:1004.2521 [hep-th]].
J. de Boer and M. Shigemori, “Exotic Branes in String Theory,” arXiv:1209.6056
[hep-th].
[130] T. Kikuchi, T. Okada and Y. Sakatani, “Rotating string in doubled geometry with
generalized isometries,” Phys. Rev. D 86 (2012) 046001 [arXiv:1205.5549 [hep-th]].
[131] F. Hassler and D. Lust, “Non-commutative/non-associative IIA (IIB) Q- and Rbranes and their intersections,” arXiv:1303.1413 [hep-th].
[132] G. Villadoro and F. Zwirner, “Beyond Twisted Tori,” Phys. Lett. B 652 (2007) 118
[arXiv:0706.3049 [hep-th]].
G. Villadoro and F. Zwirner, “On general flux backgrounds with localized sources,”
JHEP 0711 (2007) 082 [arXiv:0710.2551 [hep-th]].
[133] E. A. Bergshoeff, A. Marrani and F. Riccioni, “Brane orbits,” Nucl. Phys. B 861
(2012) 104 [arXiv:1201.5819 [hep-th]].
E. A. Bergshoeff and F. Riccioni, “The D-brane U-scan,” arXiv:1109.1725 [hep-th].

121

E. A. Bergshoeff and F. Riccioni, “Branes and wrapping rules,” Phys. Lett. B 704
(2011) 367 [arXiv:1108.5067 [hep-th]].
E. A. Bergshoeff and F. Riccioni, “Dual doubled geometry,” Phys. Lett. B 702 (2011)
281 [arXiv:1106.0212 [hep-th]].
E. A. Bergshoeff and F. Riccioni, “String Solitons and T-duality,” JHEP 1105 (2011)
131 [arXiv:1102.0934 [hep-th]].

122

