RU-96-98
hep-th/9611137
November 1996

arXiv:hep-th/9611137v5 7 Sep 1999

K3 Surfaces and String Duality
Paul S. Aspinwall
Dept. of Physics and Astronomy,
Rutgers University,
Piscataway, NJ 08855

ABSTRACT
The primary purpose of these lecture notes is to explore the moduli space of type
IIA, type IIB, and heterotic string compactified on a K3 surface. The main tool
which is invoked is that of string duality. K3 surfaces provide a fascinating arena
for string compactification as they are not trivial spaces but are sufficiently simple
for one to be able to analyze most of their properties in detail. They also make an
almost ubiquitous appearance in the common statements concerning string duality. We
review the necessary facts concerning the classical geometry of K3 surfaces that will be
needed and then we review “old string theory” on K3 surfaces in terms of conformal
field theory. The type IIA string, the type IIB string, the E8 × E8 heterotic string,
and Spin(32)/Z2 heterotic string on a K3 surface are then each analyzed in turn. The
discussion is biased in favour of purely geometric notions concerning the K3 surface
itself.

Contents
1 Introduction

2

2 Classical Geometry
2.1 Definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.2 Holonomy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.3 Moduli space of complex structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.4 Einstein metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.5 Algebraic K3 Surfaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.6 Orbifolds and blow-ups . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4
4
7
9
12
15
17

3 The World-Sheet Perspective
3.1 The Nonlinear Sigma Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.2 The Teichmüller space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.3 The geometric symmetries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.4 Mirror symmetry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.5 Conformal field theory on a torus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

25
25
27
29
31
33

4 Type II String Theory
4.1 Target space supergravity and compactification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.2 The IIA string . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.3 Enhanced gauge symmetries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.4 The IIB string . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

37
37
40
42
45

5 Four-Dimensional Theories
5.1 N = 4 theories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.2 More N = 4 theories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.3 Generalities for N = 2 theories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.4 K3 fibrations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.5 More enhanced gauge symmetries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.6 Heterotic-heterotic duality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.7 Extremal transitions and phase transitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

48
48
51
55
58
65
69
73

6 The Heterotic String
6.1 N = 1 theories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.2 Elliptic fibrations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.3 Small instantons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.4 Aspects of the E8 × E8 string . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.5 The Spin(32)/Z2 heterotic string . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.6 Discussion of the heterotic string . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

75
75
76
82
87
91
95

1

1

Introduction

The notion of “duality” has led to something of a revolution in string theory in the past
year or two. Two theories are considered dual to each other if they ultimately describe
exactly the same physics. In order for this to be a useful property, of course, it is best
if the two theories appear, at first sight, to be completely unrelated. Different notions of
duality abound depending on how the two theories differ. The canonical example is that of
“S-duality” where the coupling of one theory is inversely related to that of the other so that
one theory would be weakly coupled when the other is strongly coupled. “T-duality” can be
defined by similarly considering length scales rather than coupling constants. Thus a theory
at small distances can be “T-dual” to another theory at large distances.
In the quest for understanding duality many examples of dual pairs have been postulated.
The general scenario is that one takes a string theory (or perhaps M-theory) and compactifies
it on some space and then finds a dual partner in the form of another (or perhaps the same)
string theory compactified on some other space. In this form duality has become a subject
dominated by geometrical ideas since most of the work involved lies in analyzing the spaces
on which the string theory is compactified.
One of the spaces which has become almost omnipresent in the study of string duality is
that of the K3 surface. We will introduce the K3 surface in section 2 but let us make a few
comments here. Mathematicians have been studying the geometry of the K3 surface as a real
surface or a complex surface for over one hundred years [1]. In these lectures we will always
be working with complex numbers and so “surface” will mean a space of complex dimension
two, or real dimension four. A curve will be complex dimension one, etc. Physicists’ interest
in the K3 surface (for an early paper see, for example, [2]) was not sparked until Yau’s proof
[3] of Calabi’s conjecture in 1977. Since then the K3 surface has become a commonly-used
“toy model” for compactifications (see, for example, [4]) as it provides the second simplest
example of a Ricci-flat compact manifold after the torus.
The study of duality is best started with toy models and so the K3 surface and the torus
are bound to appear often. Another reason for the appearance of the K3 surface, as we
shall see in these lectures, is that the mathematics of the heterotic string appears to be
intrinsically bound to the geometry of the K3 surface. Thus, whenever the heterotic string
appears on one side of a pair of dual theories, the K3 surface is likely to make an appearance
in the analysis.
The original purpose of these lectures was to give a fairly complete account of the way
K3 surfaces appear in the subject of string duality. For reasons outlined above, however,
this is almost tantamount to covering the entire subject of string duality. In order to make
the task manageable therefore we will have to omit some current areas of active research.
Let us first then discuss what will not be covered in these lectures. Note that each of these
subjects are covered excellently by the other lecture series anyway.
Firstly we are going to largely ignore M-theory. M-theory may well turn out to be an
2

excellent model for understanding string theory or perhaps even replacing string theory. It
also provides a simple interpretation for many of the effects we will discussing.
Secondly we are going to ignore open strings and D-branes. There is no doubt that Dbranes offer a very good intuitive approach to many of the phenomena we are going to study.
It may well also be that D-branes are absolutely necessarily for a complete understanding of
the foundations of string theory.
Having said that M-theory and D-branes are very important we will now do our best to
not mention them. One reason for this is to able to finish giving these lectures on time but
another, perhaps more important reason is to avoid introducing unnecessary assumptions.
We want to take a kind of “Occam’s Razor” approach and only introduce constructions as
necessary. To many people’s tastes our arguments will become fairly cumbersome, especially
when dealing with the heterotic string, and it will certainly be true that a simpler picture
could be formulated using M-theory or D-branes in some instances. What is important however is that we produce a self-consistent framework in which one may analyze the questions
we wish to pose in these lectures.
Thirdly we are going to try to avoid explicit references to solitons. Since nonperturbative
physics is absolutely central to most of the later portions of these lectures one may view our
attitude as perverse. Indeed, one really cannot claim to understand much of the physics in
these lectures without considering the soliton effects. What we will be focusing on, however,
is the structure of moduli spaces and we will be able to get away with ignoring solitons in
this context quite effectively. The only time that solitons will be of interest is when they
become massless.
Our main goal is to understand the type II string and the heterotic string compactified
on a K3 surface and what such models are dual to. Of central importance will be the notion
of the moduli space of a given theory.
In section 2 we will introduce the K3 surface itself and describe its geometry. The facts we
require from both differential geometry and algebraic geometry are introduced. In section
3 we will review the “old” approach to a string theory on a K3 surface in terms of the
world-sheet conformal field theory.
In section 4 we begin our discussion of full string theory on a K3 surface in terms of
the type IIA and type IIB string. The start of this section includes some basic facts about
target-space supergravity which are then exploited.
The heterotic string is studied in section 6 but before that we need to take a long detour
into the study of string theories compactified down to four dimensions. This detour comprises
section 5 and builds the techniques required for section 6. The heterotic string on a K3 surface
is a very rich and complicated subject. The analysis is far from complete and section 6 is
technically more difficult than the preceding sections.
Note that blocks of text beginning with a “” are rather technical and may be omitted
on first reading.

3

2

Classical Geometry

In the mid 19th century the Karakorum range of mountains in Northern Kashmir acted as
a natural protection to India, then under British rule, from the Chinese and Russians to the
north. Accordingly, in 1856, Captain T. G. Montgomerie was sent out to make some attempt
to map the region. From a distance of 128 miles he measured the peaks across the horizon
and gave them the names K1, K2, K3, . . . , where the “K” stood simply for “Karakorum”
[5]. While it later transpired that most of these mountain peaks already had names known
to the Survey of India, the second peak retained the name Montgomerie had assigned it.
It was not until almost a century later in 1954 that K2, the world’s second highest peak,
was climbed by Achille Compagnoni and Lino Lacedelli in an Italian expedition. This event
led shortly afterwards to the naming of an object of a quite different character. The first
occurrence of the name “K3” referring to an algebraic variety occurs in print in [6]. It is
explained in [7] that the naming is after Kummer, Kähler and Kodaira and is inspired by
K2. It was Kummer who did much of the earliest work to explore the geometry of the space
in question.1

2.1

Definition

So what exactly is a K3 surface? Let us first introduce a few definitions. For a general
guide to some of the basic principles used in these lectures we refer the reader to chapter 0
of [8]. First we define the Hodge numbers of a space X as the dimensions of the Dolbeault
cohomology groups
hp,q (X) = dim(H p,q (X)).
(1)
Next consider the canonical class, K, which we may be taken to be defined as
K = −c1 (TX ),

(2)

where TX is the holomorphic tangent bundle of X.
A K3 surface, S, is defined as a compact complex Kähler manifold of complex dimension
two, i.e., a surface, such that
h1,0 (S) = 0
(3)
K = 0.
Note that we will sometimes relax the requirement that S be a manifold.
The remarkable fact that makes K3 surfaces so special is the following
Theorem 1 Any two K3 surfaces are diffeomorphic to each other.
1

This may explain the erroneous notion in some of the physics literature that the naming is K3 after
“Kummer’s third surface” (whatever his first two surfaces may have been). To confuse the issue slightly
there is a special kind of K3 surface known as a “Kummer surface” which is introduced in section 2.6.

4

Thus, if we can find one example of a K3 surface we may deduce all of the topological invariants. The simplest realization is to find a simple example as a complex surface embedded
in a complex projective space, i.e., as an algebraic variety. The obvious way to do this is to
consider the hypersurface defined by the equation
f = xn0 + xn1 + xn2 + xn3 = 0

(4)

in the projective space P3 with homogeneous coordinates [x0 , x1 , x2 , x3 ].
It follows from the Lefschetz hyperplane theorem [8] that h1,0 of such a hypersurface
will be zero. Next we need to find if we can determine n such that K = 0. Associated
to the canonical class is the canonical line bundle. This is simply the holomorphic line
bundle, L, such that c1 (L) = K. From our definition of K it follows that the canonical
line bundle for a manifold of dimension d can be regarded as the dth exterior power of the
holomorphic cotangent bundle. Thus a section of the canonical line bundle can be regarded
as a holomorphic d-form.
The fact that K = 0 for a K3 surface tells us that the canonical line bundle is trivial and
thus has a holomorphic section which is nowhere zero. Consider two such sections, s1 and
s2 . The ratio s1 /s2 is therefore a holomorphic function defined globally over the compact
K3 surface. From basic complex analysis it follows that s1 /s2 is a constant. We see that the
K3 surface admits a globally defined, nowhere vanishing, holomorphic 2-form, Ω, which is
unique up to a constant. It also follows that h2,0 (S) = 1.
Let us try to build Ω for our hypersurface of degree n in P3 . First define affine coordinates
in the patch x0 6= 0:
x2
x3
x1
(5)
y1 = , y2 = , y3 = .
x0
x0
x0
An obvious symmetric choice for Ω is then
Ω=

dy2 ∧ dy3
dy3 ∧ dy1
dy1 ∧ dy2
=
=
.
∂f /∂y3
∂f /∂y1
∂f /∂y2

(6)

This is clearly nonzero and holomorphic in our patch x0 6= 0. We can now consider another
patch such as x1 6= 0. A straight forward but rather tedious calculation then shows that Ω
will only extend into a holomorphic nonzero 2-form over this next patch if n = 4.
Our first example of a K3 surface is called the quartic surface, given by a hypersurface of
degree 4 in P3 . We could have arrived at this same conclusion in a somewhat more abstract
way by using the adjunction formula. Consider the tangent bundle of S, which we denote
TS , together with the normal bundle NS for the embedding S ⊂ P3 . One can then see that
TS ⊕ NS = TP3 |S ,

(7)

where TP3 |S is the restriction of the tangent bundle of the embedding P3 to the hypersurface
S.
5

Introducing the formal sum of Chern classes of a bundle E (see, for example, [9])
c(E) = 1 + c1 (E) + c2 (E) + . . . ,

(8)

c(TP3 |S ) = c(TS ) ∧ c(NS ).

(9)

we see that
Treating a wedge product as usual multiplication from now on, it is known that [8]
c(TPk ) = (1 + x)k+1 ,

(10)

where x is the fundamental generator of H 2 (Pk , Z). Since H 2 is dual to H 2(k−1) which is dual
to H2(k−1) , we may also regard x as the homology class of a hyperplane Pk−1 ⊂ Pk embedded
in the obvious way by setting one of the homogeneous coordinates to zero.2 Stated in this
way one can see that c1 (NS ) is given by nx.
Thus we have that
c(TS ) =

(1 + x)4
1 + nx

(11)
2

2

= 1 + (4 − n)x + (6 − 4n + n )x .
Again we see that n = 4 is required to obtain K = 0. Now we also have c2 which enables us
to work out the Euler characteristic, χ(S), of a K3 surface:
χ(S) =
=
=

Z

S

c2 (TS )

Z

P3

Z

P3

lS ∧ c2 (TS )

(12)

4x.6x2

= 24,
where lS is the 2-form which is the dual of the dual of the hypersurface S in the sense
explained above. One may also show using the Lefschetz hyperplane theorem that
π1 (S) = 0.

(13)

We now have enough information to compute all the Hodge numbers, hp,q . Since π1 (S) =
0, we have that the first Betti number b1 (S) = dim H 1 (S) = h1,0 + h0,1 must be zero.
2
Throughout these lectures we will often use the same notation for the 2-form and the associated 2(k − 1)cycle.

6

The Euler characteristic then fixes b2 (S) which then determines h1,1 since we already know
h2,0 = 1 from above. The result is
1
h0,0
0
0
h
h0,1
2,0
1,1
0,2
20 1.
h
h
h = 1
2,1
1,2
0
0
h
h
1
h2,2
1,0

2.2

(14)

Holonomy

Before continuing our discussion of K3 surfaces, we will take a detour and discuss the subject
of holonomy which will be of considerable use at many points in these lectures.
Holonomy is a natural concept in the differential geometry of a manifold, M, with a
vector bundle, π : E → M, with a connection. Consider taking a point, p ∈ M, and a vector
in the fibre, e1 ∈ π −1 (p). Now, following a closed path, Γ, starting and ending at p, parallel
transport this vector according to the connection. When you are done, you will have another
vector e2 ∈ π −1 (p). Write e2 = gΓ (e1 ), where gΓ (e1 ) is an element of the structure group of
the bundle. The (global) holonomy group of E → M is defined as the group generated by
all such gΓ (e1 ) for all closed paths Γ. The holonomy, HM , of a Riemannian manifold, M,
is defined as the holonomy of the tangent bundle equipped with the Levi-Civita connection
from the metric.
The holonomy of a Riemannian manifold of real dimension d is contained in O(d). If it
is orientable this becomes SO(d). The study of which other holonomy groups are possible
is a very interesting question and will be of some importance to us. We refer the reader to
[10, 11] for a full discussion of the results and derivations. We require the following:
1. HM ⊆ U( d2 ) if and only if M is a Kähler manifold.
2. HM ⊆ SU( d2 ) if and only if M is a Ricci-flat Kähler manifold.
3. HM ⊆ Sp( d4 ) if and only if M is a hyperkähler manifold.
4. HM ⊆ Sp( d4 ). Sp(1) if and only if M is a quaternionic Kähler manifold.3
5. A “symmetric space” of the form G/H where G and H are Lie groups has holonomy
H.
Actually in each case the specific representation of the group in which the fibre transforms
is also fixed. A celebrated theorem due to Berger, with contributions from Simons [11],
then states that the only other possibilities not yet mentioned are HM ∼
= G2 where the fibre
transforms as a 7 or HM ∼
= Spin(7) where the fibre transforms as an 8.
3

The “.” denotes that we take the direct product except that the Z2 centers of each group are identified.

7

There is a fairly clear relationship between the holonomy groups and the invariant forms
of the natural metric on M in the first cases. For the most general case we have that the
form
d
X
i=1

dxi ⊗ dxi

(15)

on Rd admits O(d) as the group of invariances. In the complex Kähler case we consider the
Hermitian form
d/2
X
i=1

dz̄ i ⊗ dz i

(16)

on Cd/2 which admits U( d2 ) as the invariance group.
For the next case we consider the quaternionic numbers, H. In this case the natural form
d/4
X
i=1

dζ i ⊗ dζ̄ i

(17)

on Hd/4 is preserved by Sp( d4 ). Note that writing quaternions as 2 × 2 matrices in the usual
way gives an embedding Sp( d4 ) ⊂ SU( d2 ). Thus, a hyperkähler manifold is always a Ricci-flat
Kähler manifold. In fact, one is free to choose one of a family of complex structures. Let us
denote a quaternion by q = a + bI + cJ + cK, where a, b, c, d ∈ R, I 2 = J 2 = K 2 = −1 and
IJ = K, JI = −K, etc. Given a hyperkähler structure we may choose a complex structure
given by q, where q 2 = −1. This implies a = 0 and
b2 + c2 + d2 = 1.

(18)

Thus for a given hyperkähler structure we have a whole S 2 of possible complex structures.
We will see that the K3 surface is hyperkähler when equipped with a Ricci-flat metric.
Because of the fact that quaternionic numbers are not commutative, we also have the
notion of a quaternionic Kähler manifold in addition to that of the hyperkähler manifold.
The space Hn admits an action of Sp(n). Sp(1) by multiplication on the right by n × n
quaternionic matrices in Sp(n) and by a quaternion of unit norm on the left. This also
leads to the notion of a manifold with a kind of quaternionic structure — this time the
“quaternionic Kähler manifold”. The main difference between this and the hyperkähler
manifold is that the extra Sp(1) can act on the S 2 of complex structures between patches
and so destroy any global complex structure. All that remains is an S 2 bundle of almost
complex structures which need have no global section. Thus a generic quaternionic Kähler
manifold will not admit a complex structure. When this bundle is trivial the situation
reduces to the hyperkähler case. As an example, the space HPn is quaternionic Kähler.
Note that the case n = 1 is somewhat redundant as this reduces to Sp(1). Sp(1) ∼
= SO(4),
which gives a generic orientable Riemannian manifold.
8

2.3

Moduli space of complex structures

We now want to construct the moduli space of all K3 surfaces. In order to determine the
moduli space it is very important to specify exactly what data defines a particular K3 surface.
By considering various data we will construct several different moduli spaces throughout
these lectures. To begin with we want to consider the K3 surface purely as an object in
algebraic geometry and, as such, we will find the moduli space of complex structures for K3
surfaces.
To “measure” the complex structure we need some relatively simple quantity which depends on the complex structure. This will be provided by “periods” which are simply
integrals of the holomorphic 2-form, Ω, over integral 2-cycles within S. To analyze periods
we first then require an understanding of the integral 2-cycles H2 (S, Z).
Since b2 (S) = 22 from the previous section, we see that H2 (S, Z) is isomorphic to Z22 as
a group.4 In addition to this group structure we may specify an inner product between any
two elements, αi ∈ H2 (S, Z), given by
α1 .α2 = #(α1 ∩ α2 ),

(19)

where the notation on the right refers to the oriented intersection number, which is a natural
operation on homology cycles [9]. This abelian group structure with an inner product gives
H2 (S, Z) the structure of a lattice.
The signature of this lattice can be determined from the index theorem for the signature
complex [9]
Z
τ=

S

1 2
(c − 2c2 ) = − 32 χ(S) = −16.
3 1

(20)

Thus the 22-dimensional lattice has signature (3, 19).
Poincaré duality tells us that given a basis {ei } of 2-cycles for H2 (S, Z), for each ei we
may find an e∗j such that
ei .e∗j = δij ,
(21)
where the set {e∗j } also forms a basis for H2 (S, Z). Thus H2 (S, Z) is a self-dual (or unimodular ) lattice. Note that this also means that the lattice of integral cohomology, H 2 (S, Z), is
isomorphic to the lattice of integral homology, H2 (S, Z).
The next fact we require is that the lattice H2 (S, Z) is even. That is,
e.e ∈ 2Z,

∀e ∈ H2 (S, Z).

(22)

This is a basic topology fact for any spin manifold, i.e., for c1 (TX ) = 0 (mod 2). We will
not attempt a proof of this as this is rather difficult (see, for example, Wu’s formula in [13]).
4
Actually we need the result that H2 (S, Z) is torsion-free to make this statement to avoid any finite
subgroups appearing. This follows from π1 (S) = 0 and the various relations between homotopy and torsion
in homology and cohomology [12].

9

The classification of even self-dual lattices is extremely restrictive. We will use the
notation Γm,n to refer to an even self-dual lattice of signature (m, n). It is known that m
and n must satisfy
m − n = 0 (mod 8)
(23)
and that if m > 0 and n > 0 then Γm,n is unique up to isometries [14, 15]. An isometry is
an automorphism of the lattice which preserves the inner product.
In our case, one may chose a basis such that the inner product on the basis elements
forms the matrix





























−E8

−E8
U
U
U














,













(24)

where −E8 denotes the 8 × 8 matrix given by minus the Cartan matrix of the Lie algebra
E8 and U represents the “hyperbolic plane”
0 1
1 0

U∼
=
Now we may consider periods
̟i =

Z

ei

!

.

Ω.

(25)

(26)

We wish to phrase these periods in terms of the lattice Γ3,19 we have just discussed. First
we will fix a specific embedding of a basis, {ei }, of 2-cycles into the lattice Γ3,19 . That is,
we make a specific choice of which periods we will determine. Such a choice is called a
“marking” and a K3 surface, together with such a marking, is called a “marked K3 surface”.
There is the natural embedding
Γ3,19 ∼
= R3,19 .
= H 2 (S, Z) ⊂ H 2 (S, R) ∼

(27)

We may now divide Ω ∈ H 2 (S, C) as
Ω = x + iy,
10

(28)

where x, y ∈ H 2 (S, R). Now a (p, q)-form integrated over S is only nonzero if p = q = 2 [8]
and so
Z
Ω ∧ Ω = (x + iy).(x + iy) = (x.x − y.y) + 2ix.y
S
(29)
= 0.
Thus, x.x = y.y and x.y = 0. We also have
Z

S

Ω ∧ Ω = (x + iy).(x − iy) = (x.x + y.y)
=

Z

(30)

2

S

kΩk > 0.

The vectors x and y must be linearly independent over H 2 (S, R) and so span a 2-plane in
H 2 (S, R) which we will also give the name Ω. The relations (29) and (30) determine that
this 2-plane must be space-like, i.e., any vector, v, within it satisfies v.v > 0.
Note that the 2-plane is equipped with a natural orientation but that under complex
conjugation one induces (x, y) → (x, −y) and this orientation is reversed.
We therefore have the following picture. The choice of a complex structure on a K3
surface determines a vector space R3,19 which contains an even self-dual lattice Γ3,19 and an
oriented 2-plane Ω. If we change the complex structure on the K3 surface we expect the
periods to change and so the plane Ω will rotate with respect to the lattice Γ3,19 .
We almost have enough technology now to build our moduli space of complex structures
on a K3 surface. Before we can give the result however we need to worry about special things
that can happen within the moduli space. A K3 surface which gives a 2-plane, Ω, which
very nearly contains a light-like direction, will have periods which are only just acceptable
and so this K3 surface will be near the boundary of our moduli space. As we approach the
boundary we expect the K3 surfaces to degenerate in some way. Aside from this obvious
behaviour we need to worry that some points away from this natural boundary may also
correspond to K3 surfaces which have degenerated in some way. It turns out that there
are such points in the moduli space and these will be of particular interest to us in these
lectures. They will correspond to orbifolds, as we will explain in detail in section 2.6. For
now, however, we need to include the orbifolds in our moduli space to be able to state the
form of the moduli space.
The last result we require is the following
Theorem 2 (Torelli) The moduli space of complex structures on a marked K3 surface (including orbifold points) is given by the space of possible periods.
For an account of the origin of this theorem we refer to [16]. Thus, the moduli space of
complex structures on a marked K3 surface is given by the space of all possible oriented
2-planes in R3,19 with respect to a fixed lattice Γ3,19 .
11

Consider this space of oriented 2-planes in R3,19 . Such a space is called a Grassmannian,
which we denote Gr+ (Ω, R3,19 ), and we have
+

Gr (Ω, R

3,19

)∼
=

O+ (3, 19)
.
(O(2) × O(1, 19))+

(31)

This may be deduced as follows. In order to build the Grassmannian of 2-planes in R3,19 , first
consider all rotations, O(3, 19), of R3,19 . Of these, we do not care about internal rotations
within the 2-plane, O(2), or rotations normal to it, O(1, 19). For oriented 2-planes we
consider only the index 2 subgroup which preserves orientation on the space-like directions.
We use the “+” superscripts to denote this.
This Grassmannian builds the moduli space of marked K3 surfaces. We now want to
remove the effects of the marking. There are diffeomorphisms of the K3 surface, which we
want to regard as trivial as far as our moduli space is concerned, but which have a nontrivial
action on the lattice H 2 (S, Z). Clearly any diffeomorphism induces an isometry of H 2 (S, Z),
preserving the inner product. We denote the full group of such isometries as O(Γ3,19 ).5 Our
moduli space of marked K3 surfaces can be viewed as a kind of Teichmüller space, and the
image of the diffeomorphisms in O(Γ3,19 ) can be viewed as the modular group. The moduli
space is the quotient of the Teichmüller space by the modular group.
What is this modular group? It was shown in [17, 18] that any element of O+ (Γ3,19 ) can
be induced from a diffeomorphism of the K3 surface. It was shown further in [19] that any
element of O(Γ3,19 ) which is not in O+ (Γ3,19 ) cannot be induced by a diffeomorphism. Thus
our modular group is precisely O+ (Γ3,19 ).
Treating (31) as a right coset we will act on the left for the action of the modular group.
The result is that the moduli space of complex structures on a K3 surface (including orbifold
points) is
(32)
Mc ∼
= O+ (Γ3,19 )\ O+ (3, 19)/(O(2) × O(1, 19))+ .
When dealing with Mc it is important to realize that O+ (Γ3,19 ) has an ergodic action on
the Teichmüller space and thus Mc is actually not Hausdorff. Such unpleasant behaviour
is sometimes seen in string theory in fairly pathological circumstances [20] but it seems
reasonable to expect that under reasonable conditions we should see a fairly well-behaved
moduli space. As we shall see, the moduli space Mc does not appear to make any natural
appearance in string theory and the related moduli spaces which do appear will actually be
Hausdorff.

2.4

Einstein metrics

The first modification we will consider is that of considering the moduli space of Einstein
metrics on a K3 surface. We will always assume that the metric is Kähler.
5

Sometimes the less precise notation O(3, 19; Z) is used.

12

An Einstein metric is a (pseudo-)Riemannian metric on a (pseudo-)Riemannian manifold
whose Ricci curvature is proportional to the metric. Actually, for a K3 surface, this condition
implies that the metric is Ricci-flat [21]. We may thus use the terms “Einstein” and “Ricciflat” interchangeably in our discussion of K3 surfaces.
The Hodge star will play an essential rôle in the discussion of the desired moduli space.
Recall that [9, 10]
α ∧ ∗β = (α, β)ωg ,
(33)
where α and β are p-forms, ωg is the volume form and (α, β) is given by
(α, β) = p!

Z

X

g i1 i2 g j1 j2 αi1 j1 ... βi2 j2 ... dx1 dx2 . . . ,

(34)

i1 i2 j1 j2 ...

in local coordinates. In particular, if α is self-dual, in the sense α = ∗α, then α.α > 0 in
the notation of section 2.3. Similarly an anti-self-dual 2-form will obey α.α < 0. On our K3
surface S we may decompose
H 2 (S, R) = H + ⊕ H − ,

(35)

where H ± represents the cohomology of the space of (anti-)self-dual 2-forms. We then see
that
dim H + = 3, dim H − = 19,
(36)
from section 2.3.
The curvature acts naturally on the bundle of (anti)-self-dual 2-forms. By standard
methods (see, for example, [10]) one may show that the curvature of the bundle of self-dual
2-forms is actually zero when the manifold in question is a K3 surface. This is one way
of seeing directly the action of the SU(2) holonomy of section 2.2. Since a K3 is simplyconnected, this shows that the bundle H + is trivial and thus has 3 linearly independent
sections.
Consider a local orthonormal frame of the cotangent bundle {e1 , e2 , e3 , e4 }. We may write
the three sections of H + as
s1 = e1 ∧ e2 + e3 ∧ e4
s2 = e1 ∧ e3 + e4 ∧ e2
s3 = e1 ∧ e4 + e2 ∧ e3 .

(37)

Clearly an SO(4) rotation of the cotangent directions produces an SO(3) rotation of H + .
That is, a rotation within H + is induced by a reparametrization of the underlying K3
surface. One should note that the orientation of H + is fixed.
Let us denote by Σ the space H + viewed as a subspace of H 2 (S, R). Putting dz1 = e1 +ie2
and dz2 = e3 + ie4 we obtain a Kähler form equal to s1 , and the holomorphic 2-form dz1 ∧ dz2
13

is given by s2 + is3 . This shows that Σ is spanned by the 2-plane Ω of section 2.3 together
with the direction in H 2 (S, R) given by the Kähler form.
This fits in very nicely with Yau’s theorem [3] which states that for any manifold M
with K = 0, and a fixed complex structure, given a cohomology class of the Kähler form,
there exists a unique Ricci-flat metric. Thus, we fix the complex structure by specifying the
2-plane, Ω, and then choose a Kähler form, J, by specifying another direction in H 2 (S, R).
Clearly this third direction is space-like, since
Vol(S) =

Z

S

J ∧ J > 0,

(38)

and it is perpendicular to Ω as the Kähler form is of type (1, 1). Thus Σ, spanned by Ω and
J, is space-like.
The beauty of Yau’s theorem is that we need never concern ourselves with the explicit
form of the Einstein metric on the K3 surface. Once we have fixed Ω and J, we know that a
unique metric exists. Traditionalists may find it rather unsatisfactory that we do not write
the metric down — indeed no explicit metric on a K3 surface has ever been determined to
date — but one of the lessons we appear to have learnt from the analysis of Calabi–Yau
manifolds in string theory is that knowledge of the metric is relatively unimportant.
As far as our moduli space is concerned, one aspect of the above analysis which is
important is that rotations within the 3-plane, Σ, may affect what we consider to be the
Kähler form and complex structure but they do not affect the underlying Riemannian metric.
We see that a K3 surface viewed as a Riemannian manifold may admit a whole family of
complex structures. Actually this family is parametrized by the sphere, S 2 , of ways in which
Σ is divided into Ω and J.
This property comes from the fact that a K3 surface admits a hyperkähler structure.
This is obvious from section 2.2 as a K3 is Ricci-flat and Kähler and thus has holonomy
SU(2), and SU(2) ∼
= Sp(1). The sphere (18) of possible complex structures is exactly the S 2
degree of freedom of rotating within the 3-plane Σ we found above.
Some care should be taken to show that the maps involved are surjective [22, 23] but we
end up with the following [24]
Theorem 3 The moduli space of Einstein metrics, ME , for a K3 surface (including orbifold
points) is given by the Grassmannian of oriented 3-planes within the space R3,19 modulo the
effects of diffeomorphisms acting on the lattice H 2 (S, Z).
In other words, we have a relation similar6 to (32):

6

ME ∼
= O+ (Γ3,19 )\ O+ (3, 19)/(SO(3) × O(19)) × R+ ,

(39)

Note that the orientation problem makes this look more unlike (32) than it needs to! We encourage the
reader to not concern themselves with these orientation issues, at least on first reading.

14

where the R+ factor denotes the volume of the K3 surface given by (38).
This is actually isomorphic to the space
ME ∼
= O(Γ3,19 )\ O(3, 19)/(O(3) × O(19)) × R+ ,

(40)

since the extra generator required, −1 ∈ O(3, 19), to elevate O+ (3, 19) to O(3, 19), is in the
center and so taking the left-right coset makes no difference.
Note that (40) is actually a Hausdorff space as the discrete group O(Γ3,19 ) has a properly
discontinuous action [25]. Thus we see that the global description of this space of Einstein
metrics on a K3 surface is much better behaved than the moduli space of complex structures
discussed earlier.

2.5

Algebraic K3 Surfaces

In section 2.4 we enlarged the moduli space of complex structures of section 2.3 and we found
a space with nice properties. In this section we are going to find another nice moduli space
by going in the opposite direction. That is, we will restrict the moduli space of complex
structures by putting constraints on the K3 surface. We are going to consider algebraic K3
surfaces, i.e., K3 surfaces that may be embedded by algebraic (holomorphic) equations in
homogeneous coordinates into PN for some N.
The analysis is done in terms of algebraic curves, that is, Riemann surfaces which have
been holomorphically embedded into our K3 surface S. Clearly such a curve, C, may be
regarded as a homology cycle and thus an element of H2 (S, Z). By the “dual of the dual”
construction of section 2.1 we may also regard it as an element C ∈ H 2 (S, Z). The fact that
C is holomorphically embedded may also be used to show that C ∈ H 1,1 (S) [8]. We then
have C ∈ Pic(S), where we define
Pic(S) = H 2 (S, Z) ∩ H 1,1 (S),

(41)

which is called the “Picard group”, or “Picard lattice”, of S. We also define the “Picard
number”, ρ(S), as the rank of the Picard lattice. Any element of the Picard group, e ∈
Pic(S), corresponds to a line bundle, L, such that c1 (L) = e [8]. Thus the Picard group may
be regarded as the group of line bundles on S, where the group composition is the Whitney
product.
As the complex structure of S is varied, the Picard group changes. This is because an
element of H 2 (S, Z) that was regarded as having type purely (1, 1) may pick up parts of type
(2, 0) or (0, 2) as we vary the complex structure. A completely generic K3 surface will have
completely trivial Picard group, i.e., ρ = 0.
The fact that S contains a curve C is therefore a restriction on the complex structure
of S. An algebraic K3 surface similarly has its deformations restricted as the embedding in

15

PN will imply the existence of one or more curves. As an example let us return to the case
where S is a quartic surface
f = x40 + x41 + x42 + x43 = 0,

(42)

in P3 . A hyperplane P2 ⊂ P3 will cut f = 0 along a curve and so shows the existence of
an algebraic curve C. Taking various hyperplanes will produce various curves but they are
all homologous as 2-cycles and thus define a unique element of the Picard lattice. Thus the
Picard number of this quartic surface is at least one. Actually for the “Fermat” form of f
given in (42) it turns out7 that ρ = 20 (which is clearly the maximum value we may have
since dim H 1,1 (S) = 20). A quartic surface need not be in the special form (42). We may
consider a more general
X
f=
aijkl xi0 xj1 xk2 xl3 ,
(43)
i+j+k+l=4

for arbitrary aijkl ∈ C. Generically we expect no elements of the Picard lattice other than
those generated by C and so ρ(S) = 1.
Now consider the moduli space of complex structures on a quartic surface. Since C is of
type (1, 1), the 2-plane Ω of section 2.3 must remain orthogonal to this direction.
We may determine C.C by taking two hyperplane sections and finding the number of
points of intersection. The intersection of two hyperplanes in P3 is clearly P1 and so the
intersection C ∩ C is given by a quartic in P1 , which is 4 points. Thus C.C = 4 and C spans
a space-like direction.
Our moduli space will be similar to that of (32) except that we may remove the direction
generated by C from consideration. Thus our 2-plane is now embedded in R2,19 and the
discrete group is generated by the lattice ΛC = Γ3,19 ∩ C ⊥ . Note that we do not denote ΛC
as Γ2,19 as it is not even-self-dual. The moduli space in question is then
MQuartic ∼
= O(ΛC )\ O(2, 19)/(O(2) × O(19)).

(44)

This is Hausdorff. Note also that it is a space of complex dimension 19 and that a simple
analysis of (43) shows that f = 0 has 19 deformations of aijkl modulo reparametrizations
of the embedding P3 . Thus embedding this K3 surface in P3 has brought about a betterbehaved moduli space of complex structures but we have “lost” one deformation as (32) has
complex dimension 20.
One may consider a more elaborate embedding such as a hypersurface in P2 × P1 given
by an equation of bidegree (3, 2), i.e.,
f=

X

Aa0 a1 a2 ,b0 b1 xa00 xa11 xa22 y0b0 y1b1 .

a0 +a1 +a2 =3
b0 +b1 =2

7

I thank M. Gross for explaining this to me.

16

(45)

This is an algebraic K3 since P2 × P1 itself may be embedded in P5 (see, for example, [8]).
Taking a hyperplane P1 × P1 ⊂ P2 × P1 one cuts out a curve C1 . Taking the hyperplane
P2 × {p} for some p ∈ P1 cuts out C2 . By the same method we used for the quartic above
we find the intersection matrix
!
2 3
.
(46)
3 0
Thus, denoting ΛC1 C2 by the sublattice of Γ3,19 orthogonal to C1 and C2 we have
M∼
= O(ΛC1 C2 )\ O(2, 18)/(O(2) × O(18)).

(47)

This moduli space has dimension 18 and this algebraic K3 surface has ρ(S) = 2 generically.
In general it is easy to see that the dimension of the moduli space plus the generic Picard
number will equal 20. Note that the Picard lattice will have signature (1, ρ − 1). This follows
as it is orthogonal to Ω inside R3,19 and thus has at most one space-like direction but the
natural Kähler form inherited from the ambient PN is itself in the Picard lattice and so there
must be at least one space-like direction. Thus the moduli space of complex structures on
an algebraic K3 surface will always be of the form
MAlg ∼
= O(Λ)\ O(2, 20 − ρ)/(O(2) × O(20 − ρ)),

(48)

where Λ is the sublattice of H 2 (S, Z) orthogonal to the Picard lattice. This lattice is often
referred to as the transcendental lattice of S. Note that this lattice is rarely self-dual.

2.6

Orbifolds and blow-ups

When discussing the moduli spaces above we have had to be careful to note that we may be
including K3 surfaces which are not manifolds but, rather, orbifolds. The term “orbifold” was
introduced many years ago by W. Thurston after their first appearance in the mathematics
literature in [26] (where they were referred to as “V-manifolds”). The general idea is to
slightly enlarge the concept of a manifold to objects which contain singularities produced by
quotients. They have subsequently played a celebrated rôle in string theory after they made
their entry into the subject in [27]. It is probably worthwhile noting that the definition of
an orbifold is slightly different in mathematics and physics. We will adopt the mathematics
definition which, for our purposes, we take to be defined as follows:
An orbifold is a space which admits an open covering, {Ui }, such that each
patch is diffeomorphic to Rn /Gi .
The Gi ’s are discrete groups (which may be trivial) which can be taken to fix the origin
of Rn . The physics definition however is more global and defines an orbifold to be a space
of the form M/G where M is a manifold and G is a discrete group. A physicist’s orbifold
is a special case of the orbifolds we consider here. Which definition is applicable to string
17

theory is arguable. Most of the vast amount of analysis that has been done over the last 10
years on orbifolds has relied on the global form M/G. Having said that, one of the appeals
of orbifolds is that string theory is (generically) well-behaved on such an object, and this
behaviour only appears to require the local condition.
The definition of an orbifold can be extended to the notion of a complex orbifold where
each patch is biholomorphic to Cn /Gi and the induced transition functions are holomorphic.
Since we may define a metric on Cn /Gi by the natural inherited metric on Cn , we have a
notion of a metric on an orbifold. In fact, it is not hard to extend the notion of a KählerEinstein metric to include orbifolds [28]. Similarly, a complex orbifold may be embeddable
in PN and can thus be viewed as an algebraic variety. In this case the notion of canonical
class is still valid. Thus, there is nothing to stop the definition of the K3 surface being
extended to include orbifolds. As we will see in this section, such K3 surfaces lie naturally
at the boundary of the moduli space of K3 manifolds.
An example of such a K3 orbifold is the following, which is often the first K3 surface that
string theorists encounter. Take the 4-torus defined as a complex manifold of dimension two
by dividing the complex plane C2 with affine coordinates (z1 , z2 ) by the group Z4 generated
by
zk 7→ zk + 1, zk 7→ zk + i, k = 1, 2.
(49)
Then consider the Z2 group of isometries generated by (z1 , z2 ) 7→ (−z1 , −z2 ). It is not hard
to see that this Z2 generator fixes 16 points: (0, 0), (0, 21 ), (0, 12 i), (0, 12 + 21 i), ( 12 , 0), . . . ,
( 21 + 21 i, 21 + 12 i). Thus we have an orbifold, which we will denote S0 .
Since the Z2 -action respects the complex structure and leaves the Kähler form invariant
we expect S0 to be a complex Kähler orbifold. Also, a moment’s thought shows that any of
the non-contractable loops of the 4-torus may be shrunk to a point after the Z2 -identification
is made. Thus π1 (S0 ) = 0. Also, the holomorphic 2-form dz1 ∧ dz2 is invariant. We thus
expect K = 0 for S0 . All said, the orbifold S0 has every right to be called a K3 surface.
We now want to see what the relation of this orbifold S0 might be to the general class
of K3 manifolds. To do this, we are going to modify S0 to make it smooth. This process is
known as “blowing-up”. This procedure is completely local and so we may restrict attention
to a patch within S0 . Clearly the patch of interest is C2 /Z2 .
The space C2 /Z2 can be written algebraically by embedding it in C3 as follows. Let
(x0 , x1 , x2 ) denote the coordinates of C3 and consider the hypersurface A given by
f = x0 x1 − x22 = 0.

(50)

A hypersurface is smooth if and only if ∂f /∂x0 = . . . = ∂f /∂x2 = f = 0 has no solution.
Thus f = 0 is smooth everywhere except at the origin where it is singular. We can parameterize f = 0 by putting x0 = ξ 2, x1 = η 2 , and x2 = ξη. Clearly then (ξ, η) and (−ξ, −η)
denote the same point. This is the only identification and so f = 0 in C3 really is the orbifold
C2 /Z2 we require.
18

Consider now the following subspace of C3 × P2 :
{(x0 , x1 , x2 ), [s0 , s1 , s2 ] ∈ C3 × P2 ; xi sj = xj si , ∀i, j}.

(51)

This space may be viewed in two ways — either by trying to project it onto the C3 or the P2 .
Fixing a point in P2 determines a line (i.e., C1 ) in C3 . Thus, (51) determines a line bundle
on P2 . One may determine c1 = −H for this bundle, where H is the hyperplane class. We
may thus denote this bundle OP2 (−1). Alternatively one may fix a point in C3 . If this is
not the point (0, 0, 0), this determines a point in P2 . At (0, 0, 0) however we have the entire
P2 . Thus OP2 (−1) can be identified pointwise with C3 except that the origin in C3 has been
replaced by P2 . The space (51) is thus referred to as a blow-up of C3 at the origin. The fact
the OP2 (−1) and C3 are generically isomorphic as complex spaces in this way away from
some subset means that these spaces are birationally equivalent [8]. A space X blown-up at
f and the birational map between them will usually be written
a point will be denoted X
f → X.
π:X

(52)

f The P2 which has grown out of the origin is called
That is, π represents the blow-down of X.
the exceptional divisor.
Now let us consider what happens to the hypersurface A given by (50) in C3 as we blow
f If X is blown-up at the point
up the origin. We will consider the proper transform, Ae ⊂ X.
f
p ∈ X then Ae is defined as the closure of the point set π −1 (A \ p) in X.
Consider following a path in A towards the origin. In the blow-up, the point we land
on in the exceptional P2 in the blow-up depends on the angle at which we approached the
origin. Clearly the line given by (x0 t, x1 t, x2 t), t ∈ C, x0 x1 − x22 = 0, will land on the point
[s0 , s1 , s2 ] ∈ P2 where again s0 s1 − s22 = 0. Thus the point set that provides the closure away
from the origin is a quadric s0 s1 − s22 = 0 in P2 . It is easy to show that this curve has χ = 2
and is thus a sphere, or P1 .
We have thus shown that when the origin is blown-up for A ⊂ C3 , the proper transform
of A replaces the old origin, i.e., the singularity, by a P1 . Within the context of blowing
up A, this P1 is viewed as the exceptional divisor and we denote it E. What is more, this
e is now smooth. We show this process in figure 1.
resulting space, A,
Carefully looking at the coordinate patches in Ae around E, we can work out the normal
e The result is that this line bundle is equal to O 1 (−2). We will refer to
bundle for E ⊂ A.
P
such a rational (i.e., genus zero) curve in a complex surface as a “(−2)-curve”.
Let us move our attention for a second to the general subject of complex surfaces with
K = 0 and consider algebraic curves within them. Consider a curve C of genus g. The selfintersection of a curve may be found by deforming the curve to another one, homologically
equivalent, and counting the numbers of points of intersection (with orientation giving signs).
In other words, we count the number of points which remain fixed under the deformation.
Suppose we may deform and keep the curve algebraic. Then an infinitesimal such deformation

19

A

P

3

π
P

2

P

1

~
A

~3

P

Figure 1: Blowing up A ∼
= C2 /Z2 .
may be considered as a section of the normal bundle of C and the self-intersection is the
number of zeros, i.e., the value of c1 of the normal bundle integrated over C. Thus c1 (N)
gives the self-intersection, where N is the normal bundle. Note that two algebraic curves
which intersect transversely always have positive intersection since the complex structure
fixes the orientation. Thus this can only be carried out when c1 (N) > 0. We may extend
the concept however when c1 (N) < 0 to the idea of negative self-intersection. In this case
we see that C cannot be deformed to a nearby algebraic curve.
The adjunction formula tells us the sum c1 (N) + c1 (T ), where T is the tangent bundle of
C, must give the first Chern class of the embedding surface restricted to C. Thus, if K = 0,
we have
C.C = 2(g − 1).
(53)
That is, any rational curve in a K3 surface must be a (−2)-curve. Note that (53) provides
a proof of our assertion in section 2.3 that the self-intersection of a cycle is always an even
number — at least in the case that the cycle is a smooth algebraic curve.
20

Actually, if we blow-up all 16 fixed points of our original orbifold S0 we obtain a smooth
K3 surface. To see this we need only show that the blow-up we have done does not affect
K = 0. One can show that this is indeed the case so long as the exceptional divisor satisfies
(53), i.e., it is a (−2)-curve [8]. A smooth K3 surface obtained as the blow-up of T 4 /Z2 at
all 16 fixed points is called a Kummer surface. Clearly the Picard number of a Kummer
surface is at least 16. A Kummer surface need not be algebraic, just as the original T 4 need
not be algebraic.
Now we have enough information to find how the orbifolds, such as S0 , fit into the moduli
space of Einstein metrics on a K3 surface. If we blow down a (−2)-curve in a K3 surface
we obtain, locally, a C2 /Z2 quotient singularity. The above description appeared somewhat
discontinuous but we may consider doing such a process gradually as follows. Denote the
(−2)-curve as E. The size of E is given by the integral of the Kähler form over E, that
is, J.E. Keeping the complex structure of the K3 surface fixed we may maintain E in the
Picard lattice but we may move J so that it becomes orthogonal to E. Thus E has shrunk
down to a point — we have done the blow-down.
We have shown that any rational curve in a K3 surface is an element of the Picard lattice
with C.C = −2. Actually the converse is true [16]. That is, given an element of the Picard
lattice, e, such that e.e = −2, then either e or −e gives the class of a rational curve in
the K3 surface. This will help us prove the following. Let us define the roots of Γ3,19 as
{α ∈ Γ3,19 ; α.α = −2}.
Theorem 4 A point in the moduli space of Einstein metrics on a K3 surface corresponds
to an orbifold if and only if the 3-plane, Σ, is orthogonal to a root of Γ3,19 .
If we take a root which is perpendicular to Σ, then it must be perpendicular to Ω and thus
in the Picard lattice. It follows that this root (or minus the root, which is also perpendicular
to Σ) gives a rational curve in the K3. Then, since J is also perpendicular to this root,
the rational curve has zero size and the K3 surface must be singular. Note also that any
higher genus curve cannot be shrunk down in this way as it would be a space-like or light-like
direction in the Picard lattice and could thus not be orthogonal to Σ. What remains to be
shown is that the resulting singular K3 surface is always an orbifold.
For a given point in the moduli space of Einstein metrics consider the set of roots orthogonal to Σ. Suppose this set can be divided into two mutually orthogonal sets. These
would correspond to two sets of curves which did not intersect and thus would be blown
down to two (or more) separate isolated points. Since the orbifold condition is local we may
confine our attention to the case when this doesn’t happen. The term “root” is borrowed
from Lie group theory and we may analyze our situation in the corresponding way. We may
choose the “simple roots” in our set which will span the root lattice in the usual way (see,
for example, [29]). Now consider the intersection matrix of the simple roots. It must have
−2’s down the diagonal and be negative definite (as it is orthogonal to Σ). This is entirely
21

analogous to the classification of simply-laced Lie algebras and immediately tells us that
there is an A-D-E classification of such events.
We have already considered the A1 case above. This was the case of a single isolated
(−2)-curve which shrinks down to a point giving locally a C2 /Z2 quotient singularity. To
proceed further let us try another example. The next simplest situation is that of a C2 /Z3
quotient singularity given by (ξ, η) 7→ (ωξ, ω 2η), where ω is a cube root of unity. As before
we may rewrite this as a subspace of C3 as
f = x0 x1 − x32 = 0.

(54)

The argument is very similar to the C2 /Z2 case. The difference is that now as we follow
a line into the blown-up singularity and consider the path (x0 t, x1 t, x2 t) within x0 x1 − x32 ,
the x32 term becomes irrelevant and the closure of the point set becomes s0 s1 = 0 within
P2 . This consists of two rational curves (s0 = 0 and s1 = 0) intersecting transversely (at
[s0 , s1 , s2 ] = [0, 0, 1]). Thus, when we blow-up C2 /Z3 , we obtain as an exceptional divisor
two (−2)-curves crossing at one point. Clearly this is the A2 case.
Now consider the general case of a cyclic quotient C2 /Zn . This is given by f = x0 x1 −xn2 =
0. At first sight the discussion above for the case n = 3 would appear to be exactly the same
for any value of n > 3 but actually we need to be careful that after the blow-up we really
have completely resolved the singularity. Consider the coordinate patch in OP2 (−1) written
as (51) where s2 6= 0. We may use y0 = s0 /s2 , y1 = s1 /s2 as good affine coordinates on the
base P2 and y2 = x2 as a good coordinate in the fibre. Since x0 = y0 y2 and x1 = y1 y2 , our
hypersurface becomes
y22 (y0 y1 − y2n−2 ) = 0.
(55)

Now y2 = 0 is the equation for the exceptional divisor P2 ⊂ P3 in our patch. We are
interested in the proper transform of our surface and thus we do not want to include the
full P2 in our solution — just the intersection with our surface. Thus we throw this solution
away and are left with
y0 y1 − y2n−2 = 0.
(56)
If n = 2 or 3 this is smooth. If n > 3 however we have a singularity at y0 = y1 = y2 = 0.
This point is at s0 = s1 = 0 which is precisely where the two P1 ’s produced by the blow-up
intersect. One may check that the other patches contain no singularities.
What we have shown then is that starting with the space C2 /Zn , n > 2, the blow-up
replaces the singularity at the origin by two P1 ’s which intersect at a point but, in the
case n > 3, this point of intersection is locally of the form C2 /Zn−2 . To resolve the space
completely, the procedure is clear. We simply repeat the process until we are done. Note
that when we blow up the point of intersection of two P1 ’s intersecting transversely, the
fact that the P1 ’s approach the point of intersection at a different “angle” means that after
the blow-up they pass through different points of the exceptional divisor and thus become
disjoint. We show the process of blowing-up a C2 /Z6 singularity in figure 2. In this process
22

E❅
1❅

✲

✉

E2

❅✉
❅

n=6

n=4

❄
E3

E4

❅
❅
❅ E5
E1
❅

❅
❅
❅

✛

E1

E2

❅
❅
❅
❅
✉
❅ E2
❅
E4
❅
❅
E3

smooth

n=2

Figure 2: Blowing up C2 /Z6 .
we produce a chain of 5 P1 ’s, E1 , . . . , E5 , when completely resolving the singularity. We
show the P1 ’s as lines.
Clearly we see that resolving the C2 /Zn singularity produces the An−1 intersection matrix
for the (−2)-curves. Thus we have deduced the form of the A-series. We now ponder the Dand E-series.
Consider the general form of the quotient C2 /G. We are interested in the cases which
occur locally in a K3 surface in which K = 0. This requires that G leaves the holomorphic
2-form dz1 ∧ dz2 invariant. This implies that G must be a discrete subgroup of SU(2). One
may also obtain this result by noting that the holonomy of the orbifold near the quotient
singularity can be viewed as being isomorphic to G. The subgroups of SU(2) are best
understood from the well-known exact sequence
1 → Z2 → SU(2) → SO(3) → 1.

(57)

Thus any subgroup of SU(2) can be projected into a subgroup of SO(3) and considered as a
symmetry of a 3-dimensional solid. The cyclic groups Zn may be thought of as, for example,
the symmetries of cones over regular polygons. The other possibilities are the dihedral
groups which are the symmetries of a prism over a regular polygon, and the symmetries of
the tetrahedron, the octahedron (or cube), and the icosahedron (or dodecahedron). Each
of these latter groups are nonabelian and correspond to a subgroup of SU(2) with twice as
many elements as the subgroup of SO(3). They are thus called the binary dihedral, binary
tetrahedral, binary octahedral, and binary icosahedral groups respectively. In each case the
23

Group
Cyclic



Binary
Dihedral
Binary
Tetrahedral

Generators
α
0

0
β −1

D4 , √1

2

Binary
Octahedral
Binary
Icosahedral

β
0



E6 ,
−



η3
0

0
η2



0
α−1

,

Hypersurface

Resolution

x2 + y 2 + z n = 0

An−1

, β=en

x2 + y 2 z + z n+1 = 0

Dn+2

2πi

x2 + y 3 + z 4 = 0

E6

x2 + y 3 + yz 3 = 0

E7

x2 + y 3 + z 5 = 0

E8

2πi
α=e n

 

0
−1

1
0

ε
ε

, ε=e 8

ε
0



,







1
, η2 −η
3

ε7
ε5



0
ε7

7 



πi

2πi

, ε=e 8

η + η4
1

1
−η − η4



2πi

, η=e 5

Table 1: A-D-E Quotient Singularities.
quotient C2 /G can be embedded as a hypersurface in C3 . This work was completed by Du
Val (see [30] and references therein), after whom the singularities are sometimes named. The
case of an icosahedron was done by Felix Klein last century [31] and so they are also often
referred to as “Kleinian singularities”.
Once we have a hypersurface in C3 we may blow-up as before until we have a smooth
manifold. The intersection matrices of the resulting (−2)-curves can then be shown to be
(minus) the Cartan matrix of Dn , E6 , E7 , or E8 respectively. This process is laborious and
is best approached using slightly more technology than we have introduced here. We refer
the reader to [16] or [32] for more details. The results are summarized in table 1(see [33] for
some of the details). We have thus shown that any degeneration of a K3 surface that may
be achieved by blowing down (−2)-curves leads to an orbifold singularity.
One might also mention that in the case of the An blow-ups, explicit metrics are known
which are asymptotically flat [34, 35, 36]. Unfortunately, since the blow-up inside a K3
surface is not actually flat asymptotically, such metrics represent only an approximation
to the situation we desire. As we said earlier however, lack of an explicit metric will not
represent much of a problem.
This miraculous correspondence between the A-D-E classification of discrete subgroups
of SU(2) and Dynkin diagrams for simply-laced simple Lie groups must count as one of the
most curious interrelations in mathematics. We refer to [37] or [38] for the flavour of this
subject. We will see later in section 4.3 that string theory will provide another striking
connection.
We have considered the resolution process from the point of view of blowing-up by changing the Kähler form. In terms of the moduli space of Einstein metrics on a K3 surface this is
viewed as a rotation of the 3-plane Σ so that there are no longer any roots in the orthogonal
complement. Since Σ is spanned by the Kähler form and Ω, which measures the complex
structure, we may equally view this process in terms of changing the complex structure,
rather than the Kähler form. In this language, the quotient singularity is deformed rather
than blown-up. The process of resolving is now seen, not as giving a non-zero size to a
24

shrunken rational curve, but rather changing the complex structure so that the rational
curve no longer exists. This deformation process is actually very easy to understand in
terms of the singularity as a hypersurface in C3 . Consider the An−1 singularity in table 1.
A deformation of this to
x2 + y 2 + z n + an−2 z n−2 + an−3 z n−3 + . . . + a0 = 0

(58)

will produce a smooth hypersurface for generic values of the ai ’s. (Note that the an−1 z n−1
term can be transformed away by a reparametrization.)
It is worth emphasizing that in general, when considering any algebraic variety, blow-ups
and deformations are quite different things. We will discuss later how the difference between
blowing up a singularity and deforming it away can lead to topology changing processes in
complex dimension three, for example. It is the peculiar way in which the complex structure
moduli and Kähler form get mixed up in the moduli space of Einstein metrics on a K3 surface
that makes them amount to much the same thing in this context. The relationship between
blowing up and deformations will be deepened shortly when we discuss mirror symmetry.

3

The World-Sheet Perspective

In this section we are going to embark on an analysis of string theory on K3 surfaces from
what might be considered a rather old-fashioned point of view. That is, we are going to
look at physics on the world-sheet. One point of view that was common more than a couple
of years ago was that string theory could solve difficult problems by “pulling back” physics
in the target space, which has a large number of dimensions and is hence difficult, to the
world-sheet, which is two-dimensional and hence simple. Thus an understanding of twodimensional physics on the world-sheet would suffice for understanding the universe.
More recently it has been realized that the world-sheet approach is probably inadequate
as it misses aspects of the string theory which are nonperturbative in the string coupling
expansion. Thus, attention has switched somewhat away from the world-sheet and back to
the target space. One cannot forget the world-sheet however and, as we will see later in
section 5, in some examples it would appear that the target space point of view appears on
an equal footing with the world-sheet point of view. We must therefore first extract from
the world-sheet as much as we can.

3.1

The Nonlinear Sigma Model

“Old” string theory is defined as a two-dimensional theory given by maps from a Riemann
surface, Σ, into a target manifold X:
x : Σ → X.
25

(59)

In the conformal gauge, the action is given by (see, for example, [39] for the basic ideas and
[40] for conventions on normalizations)
Z
i Z
i¯ j 2
(gij − Bij ) ∂x ∂x d z − 2π ΦR(2) d2 z + . . . ,
S=
8πα′ Σ

(60)

where we have ignored any terms which contain fermions. The terms are identified as follows.
gij is a Riemannian metric on X and Bij are the components of a real 2-form, B, on X.
Φ is the “dilaton” and is a real number (which might depend on x) and R(2) is the scalar
curvature of Σ. This two-dimensional theory is known as the “non-linear σ-model”.
In order to obtain a valid string theory, we require that the resulting two-dimensional
theory is conformally invariant with a specific value of the “central charge”. (See [41] for
basic notions in conformal field theory.) Conformal invariance puts constraints on the various
parameters above [42, 43]. In general the result is in terms of a perturbation theory in the
quantity α′ /R2 , where R is some characteristic “radius” (coming from the metric) of X,
assuming X to be compact.
The simplest way of demanding conformal invariance to leading order is to set the dilaton,
Φ, to be a constant, and let B be closed and gij be Ricci-flat. There are other solutions,
such as the one proposed in [44] and these do play a rôle in string duality as solitons (see,
for example, [45]). It is probably safe to say however that the solution we will analyze, with
the constant dilaton, is by far the best understood.
In many ways one may regard this conformal invariance calculation to be the string
“derivation” of general relativity. To leading order in α′ /R2 we obtain Einstein’s field equation and then perturbation theory “corrects” this to higher orders. Nonperturbative effects,
i.e., “world-sheet instantons”, should also modify notions in general relativity. Anyway, we
see that in this simple case, a vacuum solution for string theory is the same as that for
general relativity — namely a Ricci-flat manifold.
There is a simple and beautiful relationship between supersymmetry in this non-linear
σ-model and the Kähler structure of the target space manifold X. We have neglected to
include any fermions in the action (60) but they are of the form ψ i and transform, as far as
the target space is concerned, as sections of the cotangent bundle. A supersymmetry will be
roughly of the form
δǫ X i = ǭ lji ψ j .
(61)
The object of interest here is lji . With one supersymmetry (N = 1) on the world-sheet
one may simply reparameterize to make it equal to δji . When the N > 1 however we have
more structure. It was shown [46] that for N = 2 the second lji acts as an almost complex
structure and gives X the structure of a Kähler manifold. In the case N = 4, we have 3
almost complex structures, as in section 2.4, and this leads to a hyperkähler manifold. The
converse also applies.
Note that this relationship between world-sheet supersymmetry and the complex differential geometry of the target space required no reference to conformal invariance. In the
26

case that we have conformal invariance one may also divide the analysis into holomorphic
and anti-holomorphic parts and study them separately. In this case we have separate supersymmetries in the left-moving (holomorphic) and right-moving (anti-holomorphic) sectors.
The case of interest to us, of course, is when X is a smooth K3 manifold. From what
we have said, this will lead to an N = (4, 4) superconformal field theory, at least to leading
order in α′ /R2 . Actually for N = 4 non-linear σ-models, the perturbation theory becomes
much simpler and it can be shown [47] that there are no further corrections to the Ricci-flat
metric after the leading term. Additionally, one may present arguments that this is even true
nonperturbatively [48]. Thus our Ricci-flat metric on the K3 surface is an exact solution.
One must contrast this to the N = 2 case where there are both perturbative corrections and
nonperturbative effects in general.

3.2

The Teichmüller space

The goal of this section is to find the moduli space of conformally invariant non-linear σmodels with K3 target space. This may be considered as an intermediate stage to that of the
last section, where we considered classical geometry, and that of the following sections where
we consider supposedly fully-fledged string theory. This will prove to be a very important
step however.
Firstly note that there are three sets of parameters in (60) which may be varied to span
the moduli space required. In each case we need to know which deformations will be effective
in the sense that they really change the underlying conformal field theory. Here we will have
to make some assumptions since a complete analysis of these conformal field theories has yet
to be completed.
First consider the metric gij . We have seen that this must be Ricci-flat to obtain conformal invariance. We will assume that any generic deformation of this Ricci-flat metric
to another inequivalent Ricci-flat metric will lead to an inequivalent conformal field theory.
Since the dimension of the moduli space of Einstein metrics on a K3 surface given in (40) is
58, we see that the metric accounts for 58 parameters.
Next we have the 2-form, B. This appears in the action in the form
Z

x(Σ)

B.

(62)

Thus, since the image of the world-sheet in X under the map x is a closed 2-cycle, any exact
part of B is irrelevant. All we see of B is its cohomology class. As b2 of a K3 surface is 22,
this suggests we have 22 parameters from the B-field.
Lastly we have the dilaton, Φ. This plays a very peculiar rôle in our conformal field
theory. Since Φ is a constant over X, by assumption, we may pull it outside the integral
leaving a contribution of 2Φ(g −1) to the action, where g is the genus of Σ. In this section we
really only care about the conformal field theory for a fixed Σ and so this quantity remains
27

constant. To be more complete we should sum over the genera of Σ. Taking the limit of
α′ → ∞, the world-sheet image in the target space will degenerate to a Feynman diagram
and then g will count the number of loops. Thus we have an effective target space coupling
of
λ = eΦ .
(63)
Anyway, since we want to ignore this summation of Σ for the time being we will ignore
the dilaton. See, for example, [49] for a further discussion of world-sheet properties of the
dilaton from a string field theory point of view.
All said then we have a moduli space of 58 + 22 = 80 real dimensions. To proceed further
we need to know some aspects about the holonomy of the moduli space. The local form of
the moduli space was first presented in [50] but we follow more closely here the method of
[51].
Let us return to the moduli space of Einstein metrics on a K3 surface. Part of the
holonomy algebra of the symmetric space factor in (40) is so(3) ∼
= su(2). This rotation in R3
comes from the choice of complex structures given a quaternionic structure as discussed in
section 2.2. Thus, this part of the holonomy can be understood as arising from the symmetry
produced by the S 2 of complex structures.
This su(2) symmetry must therefore be present in the non-linear σ-model. In the case
where we have a conformal field theory however, we may divide the analysis into separate
left- and right-moving parts. Thus each sector must have an independent su(2) symmetry.
Indeed, it is known from conformal field theory that an N = 4 superconformal field theory
contains an affine su(2) algebra and so an N = (4, 4) superconformal field theory has an
su(2) ⊕ su(2) ∼
= so(4) symmetry.
This symmetry acts on the tangent directions to a point in the moduli space (i.e., the
“marginal operators”) and so will be a subgroup of the holonomy. Thus the so(3) appearing
in the holonomy algebra of the moduli space of Einstein metrics is promoted to so(4) for our
moduli space of conformal field theories.
Now we are almost done. We need to find a space whose holonomy contains SO(4)
as a factor and has dimension 80. One could suggest spaces such as A × B, where A is
a Riemannian manifold of dimension 4 and B is a Riemannian manifold of dimension 76.
Such a factorization is incompatible with what we know about the conformal field theory,
however. Analyzing the marginal operators in terms of superfields shows that each one is
acted upon non-trivially by at least part of the SO(4). Given the work of Berger and Simons
therefore leaves us with only one possibility.8
Theorem 5 Given the assumptions about the effectiveness of deformations on the underlying conformal field theory, any smooth neighbourhood of the moduli space of conformally
8

Actually we should rule out the compact symmetric space possibility. This is done by our completeness
assumption, as we know we may make a K3 surface arbitrarily large.

28

invariant non-linear σ-models with a K3 target space is isomorphic to an open subset of
Tσ =

O(4, 20)
.
O(4) × O(20)

(64)

We now want to know about the global form of the moduli space. Here we are forced to
make assumptions about how reasonable our conformal field theories can be. We will assume
that from theorem 6 it follows that the moduli space of conformal field theories is given by
Mσ ∼
= Gσ \Tσ , where Gσ is some discrete group. That is, Tσ is the Teichmüller space. All
we are doing here is assuming that our moduli space is “complete” in the sense that there
are no pathological limit points in it possibly bounding some bizarre new region. While this
assumption seems extremely reasonable I am not aware of any rigorous proof that this is the
case.

3.3

The geometric symmetries

All that remains then is the determination of the modular group, Gσ . To begin with we
should relate (64) to the Teichmüller spaces we are familiar with from section 2. This will
allow us the incorporate the modular groups we have already encountered. This is a review
of the work that first appeared in [52, 53].
The space Tσ is the Grassmannian of space-like 4-planes in R4,20 . We saw that the moduli
space of Einstein metrics on a K3 surface is given by the Grassmannian of space-like 3-planes
in R3,19 and this must be a subspace of Tσ since the Einstein metric appears in the action
(60). This gives us a clear way to proceed.
Let us introduce the even self-dual lattice Γ4,20 ⊂ R4,20 . It would be nice if we could show
that this played the same rôle as Γ3,19 played in the moduli space of Einstein metrics. That
is, we would like to show Gσ ∼
= O(Γ4,20 ). We will see this is indeed true.
First we want a natural way of choosing Γ3,19 ⊂ Γ4,20 . To do this fix a primitive element
w ∈ Γ4,20 such that w.w = 0. Now consider the space, w ⊥ ⊂ R4,20 , of all vectors x such that
x.w = 0. Clearly w is itself contained in this space. Now project onto the codimension one
subspace w ⊥ /w by modding out by the w direction. We now embed w ⊥ /w back into R4,20
such that
w⊥
(65)
∩ Γ4,20 ∼
= Γ3,19 .
w
It is important to be aware of the fact that all statements about Γ3,19 are dictated by a
choice of w. The embedding w ⊥ /w ⊂ R4,20 can be regarded as a choice of a second lattice
vector, w ∗ , such that w ∗ is orthogonal to w ⊥ /w, w ∗ .w ∗ = 0 and w ∗ .w = 1. As we shall see,
the choice of w ∗ is not as significant as the choice of w.
Now perform the same operation on the space-like 4-plane. We will denote this plane
Π ⊂ R4,20 . First define Σ′ = Π ∩ w ⊥ and then project this 3-plane into the space w ⊥ /w and
29

embed back into R4,20 to give Σ. This Σ may now be identified with that of section 2.4 to
give the Einstein metric on the K3 surface of some fixed volume.
Fixing Σ we may look at how we may vary Π to fill out the other deformations. Let Π
be given by the span of Σ′ and B ′ , where B ′ is a vector, orthogonal to Σ′ , normalized by
B ′ .w = 1. We may project B ′ into w ⊥ /w to give B ∈ R3,19 . Note that R3,19 is the space
H 2 (X, R) and so B is a 2-form as desired.
Lastly we require the volume of the K3 surface. Let us decompose B ′ as
B ′ = αw + w ∗ + B,

(66)

We claim that α is related to the volume of the K3 surface. To see this we need to analyze
the explicit form of the moduli space further.
We have effectively decomposed the Teichmüller space of conformal field theories as
O(4, 20)
O(3, 19)
∼
× R22 × R+ ,
=
O(4) × O(20)
O(3) × O(19)

(67)

where the three factors on the right are identified as the Teichmüller spaces for the metric
on the K3 surface (given by Σ), the B-field, and the volume respectively. Each of the spaces
in the equation (67) has a natural metric, given by the invariant metric for the group action
in the case of the symmetric spaces. This can be shown to coincide with the natural metric
from conformal field theory — the Zamolodchikov metric — given the holonomy arguments
above. The isomorphism (67) will respect this metric if “warping” factors are introduced
as explained in [54]. It is these warping factors which determine the identification of the
volume of the K3 surface as
Vol(S) =

Z

S

J ∧ J = 2α + B 2 .

(68)

This will be explained further in [53].9
The part of Gσ we can understand directly is the part which fixes w but acts on w ⊥ /w.
This will affect the metric on the K3 surface of fixed volume and the B-field. We know that
the modular group coming from global diffeomorphisms of the K3 surface is O+ (Γ3,19 ), which
should be viewed as O+ (H 2 (X, Z)). The discrete symmetries for the B-field meanwhile can
be written as B ∼
= B + e, where e ∈ H 2 (X, Z). To see this note that shifting B by a integer
element will shift the action (60) by a multiple of 2πi and hence will not effect the path
integral. Thanks to our normalization of B ′ , a shift of B by an element of Γ3,19 amounts
to a rotation of Π which is equivalent to an element of O(Γ4,20 ). Note that this can also be
9

This volume erroneously appeared as α in earlier versions of these notes. I thank E. Diaconescu for
pointing out this error. One may also determine this expression by considering how T-dualities in the form
of SL(2, Z) act on elliptic K3 surfaces with a section. This is beyond the scope of these notes but is hinted
at in later sections.

30

interpreted as a redefinition of w ∗ . That is, the freedom of choice of w ∗ is irrelevant once we
take into account the B-field shifts.
We may also consider taking the complex conjugate of the non-linear σ-model action.
This has the effect of reversing the sign of B while providing the extra element required to
elevate O+ (Γ3,19 ) to O(Γ3,19 ).
The result is that the subgroup of Gσ that we see directly from the non-linear σ-model
action is a subgroup of O(Γ4,20 ) consisting of rotations and translations of Γ3,19 ⊂ Γ4,20 . This
may be viewed as the space group of Γ3,19 , or equivalently, the semi-direct product
Gσ ⊃ O(Γ3,19 ) ⋉ Γ3,19 .

(69)

This is as much as we can determine from w ⊥ /w.

3.4

Mirror symmetry

To proceed any further in our analysis of Gσ we need to know about elements which do not
correspond to a manifest symmetry of the non-linear σ-model action (60). This knowledge
will be provided by mirror symmetry. Mirror symmetry is a much-studied phenomenon in
Calabi–Yau threefolds (see, for example, [55] for a review). The basic idea in the subject
of threefolds is that the notion of deformation of complex structure is exchanged with deformation of complexified Kähler form. The character of mirror symmetry in K3 surfaces is
somewhat different since, as we have seen, the notion of what constitutes a deformation of
complex structure and what constitutes a deformation of the Kähler form can be somewhat
ambiguous. Also, we have yet to mention the possibility of complexifying the Kähler form,
as that too is a somewhat ambiguous process.
Indeed mirror symmetry itself is somewhat meaningless when viewed in terms of the
intrinsic geometry of a K3 surface and does not begin to make much sense until viewed in
terms of algebraic K3 surfaces. The results for algebraic K3 surfaces were first explored
by Martinec [56], whose analysis actually predates the discovery (and naming) of mirror
symmetry in the Calabi–Yau threefold context. See also [57, 58] for a discussion of some of
the issues we cover below.
Recall that the Picard lattice of section 2.5 was defined as the lattice of integral 2-cycles
in H 2 (X, Z) which were of type (1, 1). The transcendental lattice, Λ, was defined as the
orthogonal complement of the Picard lattice in H 2 (X, Z). The signature of Λ is (2, 20 − ρ),
where ρ is the Picard number of X.
It is clear that Γ4,20 ∼
= Γ3,19 ⊕ U, where U is the hyperbolic plane of (25). We will extend
the Picard lattice to the “quantum Picard lattice”, Υ, by defining
Υ = Pic(X) ⊕ U,
as the orthogonal complement of Λ within Γ4,20 .
31

(70)

Given a K3 surface with an Einstein metric specified by Σ and a given algebraic structure,
we know that the complex structure 2-plane, Ω, is given by Σ ∩ (Λ ⊗Z R).10 The Kähler form
direction, J is then given by the orthogonal complement of Ω ⊂ Σ. Accordingly, J lies in
Pic(X) ⊗Z R.
We want to extend this to the non-linear σ-model picture. Keep Ω defined as above, or
equivalently,
Ω = Π ∩ (Λ ⊗Z R),
(71)

and introduce a new space-like 2-plane, ✵, as the orthogonal complement of Ω ⊂ Π. Clearly
we have
✵ = Π ∩ (Υ ⊗Z R).
(72)
Our notion of a mirror map will be to exchange

µ : (Λ, Ω) ↔ (Υ, ✵).

(73)

Note that as ✵ encodes the Kähler form and the value of the B-field we have the notion of
exchange of complex structure data with that of Kähler form + B-field as befits a mirror
map.
The moduli space of non-linear σ-models on an algebraic K3 surface will be the subspace
of (64) which respects the division of Π into Ω and ✵. This is given by
Tσ,alg ∼
=

O(2, ρ)
O(2, 20 − ρ)
×
,
O(2) × O(20 − ρ) O(2) × O(ρ)

(74)

where the first factor is the moduli space of complex structures and the second factor is
moduli space of the Kähler form + B-field.
Given an algebraic K3 surface X with quantum Picard lattice Υ(X) we have a mirror K3
surface, Y , with quantum Picard lattice Υ(Y ) such that Υ(Y ) is the orthogonal complement
of Υ(X) ⊂ Γ4,20 . Translating this back into classical ideas, Pic(Y ) ⊕U will be the orthogonal
complement of Pic(X) ⊂ Γ3,19 . If X is such that the orthogonal complement of Pic(X) ⊂
Γ3,19 has no U sublattice then X has no classical mirror.
Such mirror pairs of K3 surfaces were first noticed some time ago by Arnold (see for
example, [59]). The non-linear σ-model moduli space gives a nice setting for this pairing to
appear.
Now we also have the mirror construction of Greene and Plesser [60] which takes an
algebraic variety X as a hypersurface in a weighted projective space and produces a “mirror”
Y as an quotient of X by some discrete group such that X and Y as target spaces produce
completely identical conformal field theories.
An interesting case is when X is the hypersurface
f = x20 + x31 + x72 + x42
3 = 0
10

The notation Λ ⊗Z R denotes the real vector space generated by the generators of Λ.

32

(75)

in P3{21,14,6,1} . X is a K3 surface which happens to be an orbifold due to the quotient
singularities in the weighted projective space. Blowing this up provides a K3 surface with
Picard lattice isomorphic to the even self-dual lattice Γ1,9 . Thus in this case Λ ∼
= Γ2,10 .
=Υ∼
What is interesting is that in this case, the Greene-Plesser construction says that the group
by which X should be divided to obtain the mirror is trivial. This mirror map does not act
trivially on the marginal operators however but one may show actually exchanges the factors
in (74). This is little delicate and we refer the reader to [53] for details. Anyway, what this
shows is that the Greene-Plesser mirror map, which is an honest symmetry in the sense that
it produces an identical conformal field theory, really is given by the exchange, µ, in (73).
This implicitly provides us with another element of Gσ , namely an element of O(Γ4,20 )
which exchanges two orthogonal Γ2,10 sublattices. It is now possible to show that this new
element, together with the subgroup given in (69), is enough to generate O(Γ4,20 ). Thus Gσ
at least contains O(Γ4,20 ).
To prove the required result that Gσ ∼
= O(Γ4,20 ) we use the result of [25] which states
that any further generator will destroy the Hausdorff nature of the moduli space contrary
to our assumption.
We thus have
Theorem 6 Given theorem 5 and the assumption that the moduli space is Hausdorff, we
have that the moduli space of conformally invariant non-linear σ-models on a K3 surface is
Mσ = O(Γ4,20 )\ O(4, 20)/(O(4) × O(20))

(76)

Lastly we should discuss the meaning of Γ4,20 . The lattice Γ3,19 was associated to the
lattice H 2 (X, Z). Extend the notion of our inner product (19) to that of any p-cycle (or
equivalently p-form) by saying that the product of two cycles is zero unless their dimensions
add up to 4. Now one can see that the lattice of total cohomology, H ∗ (X, Z), is isomorphic
to Γ4,20 . This gives a tempting interpretation. We will see later that this really is the right
one.
This tells us how to view w. A point in the moduli space Mσ determines a conformal
field theory uniquely but we are required to make a choice of w before we can determine
the geometry of the K3 surface in terms of metrics and B-fields. This amounts to deciding
which direction in Γ4,20 will be H 0 (X, Z). This choice is arbitrary and different choices will
lead to potentially very different looking K3 surfaces which give the same conformal field
theory. This may be viewed as a kind of T-duality.

3.5

Conformal field theory on a torus

Although our main interest in these lectures are K3 surfaces, it turns out that the idea of
compactification of strings on a torus will be intimately related. We are thus required to be
familiar with the situation when the σ-model has a torus as a target space.
33

The problem of the moduli space in this case was solved in [61, 62]. This subject is
also covered by H. Ooguri’s lectures in this volume and we refer the reader there for further
information (see also [63]). Here we will quickly review the result in a language appropriate
for the context in which we wish to use it.
To allow for the heterotic string case, we are going to allow for the possibility that the
left-moving sector of the σ-model may live on a different target space to that of the rightmoving sector. We thus consider the left sector to have a torus of nL real dimensions as its
target space and let the right-moving sector live on a nR -torus. Of course, for the simple
picture of a string propagating on a torus, we require nL = nR .
The moduli space of conformal field theories is then given by
O(ΓnL ,nR )\ O(nL , nR )/(O(nL ) × O(nR )).

(77)

The even self-dual condition, required for world-sheet modular invariance [61], on the lattice
ΓnL ,nR enforces nL −nR ∈ 8Z. Note that whether we impose any supersymmetry requirements
or not makes little difference. The only Ricci-flat metric on a torus is the flat one, which
guarantees conformal invariance to all orders. The trivial holonomy then means that a torus
may be regarded as Kähler, hyperkähler or whatever so long as the dimensions are right.
Let us assume without loss of generality that nL ≤ nR .11 Our aim here is to interpret
the moduli space (77) in terms of the Grassmannian of space-like nL -planes in RnL ,nR . Let
us use Π to denote a space-like nL -plane. Any vector in RnL ,nR may be written as a sum of
two vectors, pL + pR , where
pL ∈ Π
(78)
pR ∈ Π⊥ ,

and Π⊥ is the orthogonal complement of Π. Thus pL .pL ≥ 0 and pR .pR ≤ 0.
The winding and momenta modes of the string on the torus are now given by points
in the lattice ΓnL ,nR according to Narain’s construction [61]. The left and right conformal
weights of such states are then given by 12 pL .pL and − 12 pR .pR , thus allowing the mass to be
determined in the usual way.
It is easy to see how the moduli space (77) arises from this point of view. The position
of Π determines pL and pR for each mode. The modular group O(ΓnL ,nR ) merely rearranges
the winding and momenta modes.
Let us try to make contact with the σ-model description of the string. We choose a null
(i.e., light-like) nL -plane, W , in ΓnL ,nR ⊗Z R ∼
= RnL ,nR which is “aligned” along the lattice
ΓnL ,nR . By this we mean that W is spanned by a subset of the generators of ΓnL ,nR . We
11

This means that the heterotic string will be chosen to be a superstring in the left-moving sector and
a bosonic string in the right-moving sector. Unfortunately this differs from the usual convention. This is
imposed on us, however, when we consider duality to a type IIA string and the natural orientation of a K3
surface.

34

then define W ∗ as the null nL -plane dual to W , and the time-like space V ∼
= RnR −nL so that
ΓnL ,nR ⊗Z R ∼
= W ⊕ W ∗ ⊕ V.

(79)

This decomposition is also aligned with the lattice so that ΓnL ,nR ∩ W , ΓnL ,nR ∩ W ∗ , and
ΓnL ,nR ∩ V generate ΓnL ,nR .
We may write Π as given by
Π = {x + ψ(x) + A(x); ∀x ∈ W },
where

(80)

ψ : W → W∗

(81)

A:W →V

Viewing ψ as

ψ : W × W → R,

(82)

we may divide ψ into symmetric, G, and anti-symmetric parts, B, such that ψ = B + G.
Physically W represents, under the metric G, the target space in which the string lives.
To be precise, the target space nL -torus is
W
ΓnL ,nR ∩ W

.

(83)

W ∗ is then the dual space in which the momenta live. Clearly B is the B-field. Lastly V
represents the gauge group generated by the extra right-moving directions. To be precise,
the group is given by
V
.
(84)
U(1)nR −nL ∼
=
ΓnL ,nR ∩ V

We will discuss in section 4.3 how this group can be enhanced to a nonabelian group for particular Π’s. The quantity A then represents u(1)-valued 1-forms. We will follow convention
and refer to these degrees of freedom within A as “Wilson Lines”.
One may write G, B and A in terms of matrices to make contact with the expressions in
[62, 63]. This is a somewhat cumbersome process but the reader should check it if they are
unsure of this construction. Here we illustrate the procedure in the simplest case, namely
that of a circle as target space. Here we have nL = nR = 1 and Γ1,1 ∼
= U as in (25). An
element of O(1, 1) preserving the form U may be written in one of the forms
t 0
0 t−1

!

,

−t
0
0 −t−1

!

,

where t is real and positive.
35

0
t−1

t
0

!

,

0
−t
−t−1 0

!

,

(85)

e*

Π

m

θ
θ

e

n

α

Π

Figure 3: The moduli space picture for a string on a circle.
We divide this space by O(1) × O(1) from the right and by O(Γ1,1 ) from the left. Both
these groups are isomorphic to Z2 × Z2 and are given by (85) with t = 1. The result is that
the moduli space is given by the real positive line mod Z2 represented by
t 0
0 t−1

!

∼
=

t−1 0
0 t

!

,

(86)

where t is real and positive.
Let us chose a basis, {e, e∗ }, for Γ1,1 so that e.e = e∗ .e∗ = 0 and e.e∗ = 1. Now let the
space-like direction, Π, be given, as in figure 3, by
Π = {xe + xe∗ tan θ; x ∈ R},

(87)

where t = tan θ. (Note that Π and Π⊥ may not look particularly orthogonal in figure 3 but
don’t forget we are using the hyperbolic metric given by U!) Denoting a state in Γ1,1 by
ne + me∗ , for m, n ∈ Z, one can show
m2
2 tan θ
m2
.
pR .pR = − 12 n2 tan θ + nm −
2 tan θ
pL .pL = 21 n2 tan θ + nm +

36

(88)

Since G is given by tan θ, the radius of the circle is proportional to tan θ. The identification
in (86) then gives the familiar “R ↔ 1/R” T-duality relation.

4

Type II String Theory

Now we have the required knowledge from classical geometry and “old” string theory on
the world-sheet to tackle full string theory on a K3 surface. We begin with the most supersymmetry to make life simple. This is the type IIA or IIB superstring which has 2
supersymmetries when viewed as a ten-dimensional field theory. The heterotic string on a
K3 surface constitutes a much more difficult problem and we won’t be ready to tackle it
until section 6.

4.1

Target space supergravity and compactification

We begin by switching our attention from the quantum field theory that lives in the worldsheet to the effective quantum field theory that lives in the target space in the limit that
α′ /R2 → 0. Of particular interest will be theories with N supersymmetries in d dimensions
(one of which is time).
A spinor is an irreducible representation of the algebra so(1, d − 1) and has dimension
d+1
2[ 2 ]−1 , where the bracket means round down to the nearest integer. This is not the only
information about the representation we require however. A spinor may be real (R), complex
(C), or quaternionic12 (H) depending on d. The rule is
R if d = 1, 2, 3 (mod 8)
C if d = 0 (mod 4)
H if d = 5, 6, 7 (mod 8).
A complex representation has twice as many degrees of freedom as a real representation. A
quaternionic representation has the same number of degrees of freedom as a complex representation (as, even though one may define the representation naturally over the quaternions,
one must subject it to constraints [29]). In terms of the language often used in the physics
literature: in even numbers of dimensions we use Weyl spinors; real spinors are “Majorana”
and quaternionic spinors are “symplectic Majorana”.13
We may now list the maximal number of supersymmetries in each dimension subject to
the constraint that no particle with spin > 2 appears. It was determined in [64] that N = 1
in d = 11 was maximal in this regard. To get the other values we simply maintain the
number of degrees of freedom of the spinors. For example, in reducing to ten dimensions we
go from 32 real degrees of freedom per spinor to 16 real degrees of freedom per spinor. We
thus need two spinors in ten dimensions. The result is shown in table 2.
12
13

Sometimes the terminology “pseudo-real” is used.
Note that two symplectic Majorana spinors make up one quaternionic spinor.

37

d
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3

N
1
2
2
2
2
4
4
8
16

Rep
R32
R16
R16
C8
H8
H4
H4
C2
R2

Table 2: Maximum numbers of supersymmetries.
When d ∈ 4Z + 2, the left and right spinors in the field theory are independent and
the supersymmetries may be separated. As we did in section 3.1, we will denote a theory with NL left supersymmetries and NR right supersymmetries as having N = (NL , NR )
supersymmetry. For purposes of counting total supersymmetries, N = NL + NR .
Now we want to see what happens when we compactify such a theory down to a lower
number of dimensions. That is, we replace the space R1,d0 −1 by R1,d1 −1 × X, for some
compact manifold X of dimension d0 − d1 . To see what happens to the supersymmetries
we need to consider how a spinor of so(1, d0 − 1) decomposes under the maximal subalgebra
so(1, d0 − 1) ⊃ so(1, d1 − 1) ⊕ so(d0 − d1 ). The holonomy of X will act upon representations
of so(d0 − d1 ). Any representation of so(1, d1 − 1) ⊕ so(d0 − d1 ) which is invariant under
this action will lead to representations of so(1, d1 − 1) in our new compactified target space.
This tells us how to count supersymmetries.
As the first example, consider toroidal compactification. In this case the torus is flat
and so the holonomy is trivial. Thus every representation survives. Compactifying N = 1
supergravity in eleven dimensions down to d dimensions results in reproducing the maximal
supersymmetries in table 2. Note that for d = 10 the supersymmetry is N = (1, 1) and for
d = 6 the supersymmetry is N = (2, 2). One simple way of deducing this immediately is
from the general result [65] that compactification of eleven dimensional supergravity on any
manifold results in a non-chiral theory.14
Naturally our next example will be compactification on a K3 surface. In this case the
holonomy is SU(2). Let us consider the case of an N = 1 theory in ten dimensions compactified down to six dimensions on a smooth K3 surface. The required decomposition is

14

so(1, 9) ⊃ so(1, 5) ⊕ so(4) ∼
= so(1, 5) ⊕ su(2) ⊕ su(2).

(89)

Fortunately recent progress in M-theory appears to tell us that compactification on spaces which are
not manifolds can circumvent this statement (see, for example, [66]).

38

The spinor decomposes accordingly as 16 → (4, 2, 1) ⊕ (4, 1, 2). We may take the last su(2)
in (89) as the holonomy. Thus the (4, 2, 1) part is preserved. It may look like we have 2
spinors in 6 dimensions at this point but remember that our spinor in ten dimensions was
real and spinors in six dimensions are quaternionic. Thus the degrees of freedom give only a
single spinor in six dimensions. That is, N = 1 supergravity in ten dimensions compactified
on a smooth K3 surface will give an N = 1 theory in six dimensions. The general rule is
that compactification on a smooth K3 surface will preserve half as many supersymmetries
as compactifying on a torus.
In the case that the number the supersymmetries or the number of dimensions is large,
the form of the moduli space of possible supergravity theories becomes quite constrained.
Holonomy is again the agent responsible for this. Let us write the notion of extended
supersymmetry very roughly in the form
i

{Q , Qj } = δ ij P,

(90)

where Q are the supersymmetry generators and P is translation (we may ignore any central
charge for purposes of our argument). Now such a relationship must clearly be preserved
as we go around a loop in the moduli space. However, the supersymmetries may transform
among themselves as we do this. This gives us a restriction on the holonomy of the bundle of
supersymmetries over the moduli space. Comparing (90) to the analysis of invariant forms in
section 2.2 tells us immediately what this restriction is. In the case that the spinor is of type
R, C, or H, the holonomy algebra will be (or contain) so(N), u(N), or sp(N) respectively.
Note that when we have chiral spinors in 4Z + 2 dimensions we may factor the holonomy
into separate left and right parts since these sectors will not mix.
Now the tangent directions in the moduli space are given by massless scalar fields which
lie in supermultiplets. These multiplets have a definite transformation property under the
holonomy group above. For a thorough account of this process we refer to [67]. This relates
the holonomy of the bundle of supersymmetries to the holonomy of the tangent bundle of
the moduli space. This knowledge can tell us a great deal about the form of the moduli
space.
As an example consider N = 4 supergravity in five dimensions from table 2. We see
immediately that the holonomy algebra of the moduli space is sp(4). An analysis of the representation theory of the supergravity multiplet shows that the massless scalars transforms
in a 42 of sp(4). The only possibility from Berger and Simons result, and Cartan’s classification of noncompact symmetric spaces, is that the moduli space is locally E6(6) / Sp(4)∼ ,
where the tilde subscript denotes a quotient by the central Z2 . The moduli spaces for all the
entries in table 2 are given in [68].

39

4.2

The IIA string

The type IIA superstring in ten dimensions yields, in the low-energy limit, a theory of tendimensional supergravity with N = (1, 1) supersymmetry. If we compactify this theory on
a K3 surface then each of these supersymmetries gives a supersymmetry in six dimensions
and so the result is an N = (1, 1) theory in six dimensions.
The local holonomy algebra from above must therefore be sp(1)⊕sp(1) ∼
=
= su(2)⊕su(2) ∼
so(4). There are two types of supermultiplet in six dimensions which contain moduli fields:
1. The supergravity multiplet contains the dilaton which is a real scalar.
2. Matter multiplets each contain 4 real massless scalars which transform as a 4 of so(4).
Thus the moduli space must factorize (at least locally) into a product of a real line for the
dilaton times the space parametrized by the moduli coming from the matter multiplets.
Thus, given the assumption concerning completeness, the Teichmüller space is of the form
O(4, m)
× R,
O(4) × O(m)

(91)

where m is the number of matter multiplets.
As well as the metric, B-field and dilaton, the type II string also contains “RamondRamond” states (see, for example, [39]). For the type IIA string these may be regarded as
a 1-form and a 3-form.15 A p-form field can produce massless fields upon compactification
by integrating it over nontrivial p-cycles in the compact manifold. As a K3 surface has no
odd cycles, no moduli come from the R-R sector. Thus, comparing (91) to (76) we see that
m = 20.
The moduli space of conformal field theories may be considered as living at the boundary
of the moduli space of string theories in the limit that Φ → −∞, i.e., weak string-coupling.
Thus O(Γ4,20 ) acts on this boundary. Given the factorization of the holonomy between the
dilaton and the matter fields (as they transform in different representations of so(4)) the
action of O(Γ4,20 ) also acts away from the boundary in a trivial way on the dilaton. It is
believed that moduli space is given simply by
MIIA ∼
= Mσ × R.

(92)

That is, there are no identifications which incorporate the dilaton. Certainly any duality
which mixed the factors would not respect the holonomy. Thus the only possibility remaining
would be an action of the form Φ → −Φ which would be a strong-weak coupling duality
(acting trivially on all other moduli). Instead of such an S-duality, a far more curious type
of duality was suggested in [70, 71] as we now discuss.
15

In a sense all odd forms may be included [69].

40

The form of the moduli space of toroidal conformal field theories (77) in section 3.5 bares
an uncanny resemblance to that of the moduli space of K3 conformal field theories, Mσ .
Indeed they are identical if nL = 4 and nR = 20. This is precisely the moduli space of
conformal field theories associated to a heterotic string compactified on a 4-torus. Recall
that the heterotic string consists of a superstring in the left-moving sector and a bosonic
string in the right-moving sector. As such there are 16 extra dimensions in the right-moving
sector which are compactified on a 16-torus and contribute towards the gauge group. In ten
dimensions the heterotic string is an N = (1, 0) theory and thus yields an N = (1, 1) theory
in six dimensions when compactified on a 4-torus.
The suggestion, which at first appears outrageous, is that the type IIA string compactified
on a K3 surface is the same thing, physically, as the heterotic string compactified on a 4torus. Although the moduli space of conformal field theories is identical for these models, the
world-sheet formulation is so different that any notion that the two conformal field theories
could be shown to be equivalent is doomed from the start. The claim however is not that
the conformal field theories are equivalent, but that the full string theories are equivalent.
The heterotic string has a dilaton, just like the type IIA string, and so the moduli space of
heterotic string theories is also Mσ × R. The only way we can map these two moduli spaces
into each other without identifying the conformal field theories is thus to map Φ from one
theory to −Φ from the other.
This then, is the alternative to S-duality for the type IIA string.
Proposition 1 The type IIA string compactified on a K3 surface is equivalent to the heterotic string compactified on a 4-torus. The moduli spaces are mapped to each other in
the obvious way except that the strongly-coupled type IIA string maps to the weakly-coupled
heterotic string and vica versa.
It would be nice at this point if we could prove proposition 1. Unfortunately it appears
that string theory is simply not sufficiently defined to allow this. We should check first that
this proposition is consistent with what we do know about string theory.
The fact that the moduli spaces of the type IIA string on a K3 surface and the heterotic
string on a 4-torus are identical is a good start. Next we may check that the effective sixdimensional field theory given by each is the same. This analysis was done in [71]. The
result is affirmative but there is some new information. To achieve complete agreement the
flat six-dimensional spaces given by the two string theories are not identical but instead the
metrics are scaled with respect to each other. That is, let g6 denote the six-dimensional
space-time metric and Φ the dilaton, then
ΦHet = −ΦIIA
g6,Het = e2ΦHet g6,IIA .

(93)

Other checks may be performed too. Since the strings are related by a strong-weak
coupling relations, the fundamental particles in one theory should map to solitons of the
41

other theory. This has been analyzed to a great extent but we refer to J. Harvey’s lectures
for an account of this.
To date nothing has been discovered in known string theory to disprove proposition 1.
Assuming there are no such inconsistencies one may wish to boldly assert that proposition
1 is true by definition. That is, whatever string theory may turn out to be, we will demand
that it satisfies proposition 1. This is the point of view we will take from now on.

4.3

Enhanced gauge symmetries

One of the interesting questions we are now fully equipped to address is that of the gauge
symmetry group of the six-dimensional theory resulting from either a compactification of a
type IIA string on a K3 surface, or a heterotic string on a 4-torus.
Firstly we may consider this question from the point of view of conformal field theory.
The type IIA string produces gauge fields from the R-R sector. The 1-form gives a U(1).
The 3-form may be compactified down to a 1-form over 2-cycles in b2 (S) = 22 ways. Lastly,
writing the 3-form as C3 , we have a dual field C3∗ given by
dC3∗ = ∗dC3,

(94)

where C3∗ is a one form and also gives a U(1). Thus, all told, we have a gauge group of U(1)24 .
Note that it is not possible to obtain a nonabelian gauge theory, as far as the conformal field
theory is concerned, because the R-R fields are so reluctant to couple to any other fields
(see, for example, [72]).
Now consider the heterotic string picture. As explained in section 3.5, generically we
obtain a U(1)16 contribution to the gauge group from the extra 16 right-moving degrees of
freedom for the heterotic string. We also obtain 4 “Kaluza-Klein” U(1) factors from the
metric from the 4 isometries of the torus. Lastly, the B-field is a 2-form and so contributes
b1 (T 4 ) = 4 more U(1)’s. All told we have U(1)24 again as befits proposition 1.
Things become more interesting however when we realize that the heterotic string can
exhibit larger gauge groups at particular points in the moduli space. What happens is that
some winding/momentum modes of Γ4,20 may happen to give physical massless vectors for
special values of the moduli. Such states will be charged with respect to the generic U(1)24
and so a nonabelian group results.
The heterotic string is subject to a GSO projection to yield a supersymmetric field theory
and this effectively prevents any new left-moving physical states from becoming massless.
This may be thought of as a similar statement to the assertion that the type IIA string
could never yield extra massless vectors. The right-moving sector of the heterotic string is
not subject to such constraints however, and we may use our knowledge from section 3.5 to
determine exactly when this gauge group enhancement occurs.
The vertex operator for one of our new massless states will be as follows. For the leftmoving part we want simply ∂X µ to give a vector index. For the right-moving part we
42

require another operator with conformal weight one. This results in a requirement that we
desire a state with pL = 0 and pR .pR = −2. Thus we require an element α ∈ Γ4,20 which is
orthogonal to Π and is such that α.α = −2.
The charge of such a state, α, with respect to the U(1)24 gauge group is simply given
by the coordinates of α. This follows from the conformal field theory of free bosons and we
refer to [41] for details. Comparing this to the standard way of building Lie algebras, we see
that α looks like a root of a Lie algebra, whose Cartan subalgebra is u(1)⊕24 (except that
the Killing form is negative definite rather than positive definite).
In the simplest case, there will be only a single pair ±α which satisfy the required
condition. This then will add two generators to the gauge group charged with respect to
one of the 24 U(1)’s. Thus the gauge group will be enhanced to SU(2) × U(1)23 . Note that
this enhancement to an SU(2) gauge group can also be seen in the simple case of a string
on a circle as was pictured in figured 3. If θ = 45◦ then the lattice element marked α in the
figure (together with −α) will generate SU(2).
The general rule then should be that the set of all vectors given by
A = {α ∈ Γ4,20 ∩ Π⊥ ; α.α = −2},

(95)

will form the roots of the nonabelian part of the gauge group. Note that the rank of the
gauge group always remains 24. Note also that the roots all have the same length, i.e., the
gauge group is always simply-laced and falls into the A-D-E classification.
This allows us to build large gauge groups. One thing one might do, for example, is to
split Γ4,20 ∼
= Γ4,4 ⊕ Γ8 ⊕ Γ8 , where Γ8 is the Cartan matrix of E8 (with a negative-definite
signature). We may then consider the case where Π ⊂ Γ4,4 ⊗Z R. This would mean that any
element in Γ8 ⊕ Γ8 is orthogonal to Π and thus the gauge group is at least E8 × E8 . Looking
at (80) we see that this is equivalent to putting A = 0. Thus we reproduce the simple result
that the E8 ×E8 heterotic string compactified on a torus has gauge group containing E8 ×E8
if no Wilson lines are switched on.
Proposition 1 now tells us something interesting. Despite the fact that the conformal
field theory approach to the type IIA string insisted that it could never have any gauge
group other than U(1)24 , the dual picture in the heterotic string dictates otherwise. There
must be some points in the moduli space of a type IIA string compactified on a K3 surface
where the conformal field theory misses part of the story and we really do get an enhanced
gauge group.
Since we know exactly where the enhanced gauge groups appear in the moduli space of
the heterotic string and we know exactly how to map this to the moduli space of K3 surfaces,
we should be able to see exactly when the conformal field theory goes awry.
We will determine just which K3 surfaces give rise to this behaviour for the type IIA
string. To do this we are required to choose w as in section 3.3 so that we can find a

43

geometric description. Let us first assume that we may choose w so that
α∈

w⊥
,
w

∀α ∈ A.

(96)

Let w ∗ be the same vector as was introduced in equation (66). Any vector in Π can be
written as a sum x + bw ∗ + cw, where b, c ∈ R and x ∈ Σ. Thus, the statement that α is
orthogonal to Π implies that α is orthogonal to Σ. Now we use the results of section 2.6
which tell us that this implies that the K3 surface is an orbifold. To be precise, the set A
corresponds to the root diagram of the A-D-E singularity given in table 1.
What we have just shown is a remarkable fact (and was first shown by Witten in [71]).
Proposition 2 If we have a K3 surface with an orbifold singularity then a type IIA string
compactified on this surface can exhibit a nonabelian gauge group such that the A-D-E classification of orbifold singularities coincides perfectly with the A-D-E classification of simplylaced Lie groups.
This proposition rests on proposition 1 and the assumptions that went into building the
moduli spaces. As an example, we see that an SU(n) gauge group corresponds to a singularity
locally of the form C2 /Zn .
Note that the orbifold singularity is not a sufficient condition for an enhanced gauge
symmetry. For Π to be orthogonal to α we also require that B ′ , and hence B, is also
perpendicular to α. One way of stating this is to say that the component of B along the
direction dual to α is zero. Note that the volume of the K3 surface does not matter in this
context.
It is probably worth emphasizing here that this statement about the B-field can be
important [73]. Orbifolds are well-known as “good” target spaces for string theory in that
they lead to finite conformal field theories. It might first appear then that we are saying
that the conformal field theory picture is breaking down at a point in the moduli space
where an enhanced gauge group appears but when the conformal field theory appears to be
perfectly reasonable. This is not actually the case. The enhanced gauge symmetry appears
when B = 0 along the relevant direction. Conformal field theory orbifolds however tend
to give the value B = 21 . Thus, the point in the moduli space corresponding to the happy
conformal field theory orbifold and the point where the enhanced gauge group appears are
not the same. There is good reason to believe the conformal field theory at the point where
the enhanced gauge group appears is not well-behaved [74].
What happens if we relax our condition on w given in (96)? Now the situation is not
so clear. Σ need not be perpendicular to any α and so the K3 surface may be smooth. If
this is the case, the volume of the K3 surface cannot be arbitrarily large. This is because in
the large radius limit, Π is roughly the span of Σ and w, but α is not perpendicular to w.
In fact, the volume of the K3 surface must be of order one in units of (α′ )2 . Thus we see,
assuming the B-field is tuned to the right value, that an enhanced gauge group arises when
44

the K3 surface has orbifold singularities and is any size, or if the K3 surface is very small
and is given just the right (possibly smooth) shape.
Note that to get a very large gauge group we probably require the K3 surface be singular
and it to be very small. This is necessary, for example, if we want a gauge group E8 × E8 ×
SU(2)4 × U(1)4 . Note that this latter group is “maximal” in the sense that the nonabelian
part is of rank 20, which is the maximal rank sublattice that can be orthogonal to Π.
We have proven the appearance of nonabelian gauge groups by assuming proposition
1. Instead one might like to attempt some direct justification. This is probably best seen
by using Strominger’s notion of “wrapping p-branes” [75]. The general idea is that the R-R
solitons are associated with cycles in the target space and the mass of these states is given by
the area (or volume) of these cycles. Thus, as the K3 surface acquires a quotient singularity
an S 2 shrinks down and thus a soliton becomes massless. We will not pursue the details of
this construction as solitons lie somewhat outside our intended focus of these lectures. We
also refer the reader to [76, 77] for further discussion.

4.4

The IIB string

The type IIB superstring in ten dimensions yields, in the low-energy limit, a theory of tendimensional supergravity with N = (2, 0) supersymmetry. If we compactify this theory on
a K3 surface then each of these supersymmetries gives a supersymmetry in six dimensions
and so the result is an N = (2, 0) theory in six dimensions.
The local holonomy algebra from above must therefore be sp(2) ∼
= so(5). There is only
one type of supermultiplet in six dimensions which contains massless scalars and that is
the matter supermultiplet. Each such multiplet contains five scalars transforming as a 5 of
so(5). Thus, given the assumption concerning completeness, the Teichmüller space is of the
form [78]
O(5, m)
,
(97)
O(5) × O(m)

where m is the number of matter multiplets.
In addition to the metric, B-field and dilaton, moduli may also arise from the R-R fields.
The type IIB string in ten dimensions has a 0-form, a 2-form and a self-dual 4-form. The
0-form gives b0 (S) = 1 modulus. The 2-form gives b2 (S) = 22 moduli. The 4-form gives
b4 (S) = 1 modulus. One might also try to take the dual of the 4-form to give another
modulus. This would be over-counting the degrees of freedom however, as the 4-form is
self-dual. Thus, the number of moduli are given by

45

Metric
B-field
Dilaton
0-form
2-form
4-form
Total

58
22
1
1
22
1
105

To get the dimension of the Teichmüller space correct we require m = 21.
To find the discrete group acting on the Teichmüller space we go through a procedure
remarkably similar to that of section 3.4 where we found the moduli space of conformal field
theories. Firstly we may consider the Teichmüller space as the Grassmannian of space-like
5-planes in R5,21 . Denote the 5-plane by Θ. Then we choose a primitive null element, u, of
Γ5,21 . Now we have u⊥ /u ∼
= R4,20 . We may define Π′ = Θ ∩ u⊥ . Define the vector R′ by
demanding that Π′ and R′ span Θ, R′ be orthogonal to Π′ and u.R′ = 1. Then project Π′
and R′ into u⊥ /u to obtain the space-like 4-plane, Π, and the vector, R, respectively.
Clearly we now interpret Π in terms of the underlying conformal field theory on the
K3 surface. R represents the degrees of freedom coming from the R-R sector. The sixdimensional dilaton may be deduced from R′ − R just as the volume of the K3 surface was
deduced from B ′ − B in section 3.4.
It is important to note that this construction provides considerable evidence for our
identification of R4,20 with H ∗ (S, Z) in section 3.4. This is because R, which represents the
R-R degrees of freedom, is a vector in R4,20 — the same space in which Π lives. We also saw
how these moduli arise from H 0 ⊕ H 2 ⊕ H 4 ∼
= H ∗.
Generating the discrete modular group, GIIB (which, as the reader will have guessed,
will turn out to be O(Γ5,21 )) is slightly different to the way we built O(Γ4,20 ) in section
3.4, but we show here that we can reduce it to the same problem. First note that we have
O(Γ4,20 ) ⊂ GIIB . That is, any symmetry of the conformal field theory will be a symmetry
of the string theory (just as any symmetry of the classical geometry is a symmetry of the
conformal field theory).
The next ingredient we use will be that of S-duality of the type IIB string in ten dimensions [70, 71]. This asserts that there is an SL(2, Z) symmetry acting on the ten-dimensional
dilaton and the axion (i.e., the R-R 0-form). This group is generated by a strong-weak coupling interchange of the form Φ10,IIB → −Φ10,IIB , and a translation of the axion by one. While
one might assert this S-duality statement as a distinct conjecture, it is certainly intimately
related to other duality statements. One simple way of “deriving” it is to see that it is almost
an inevitable consequence of M-theory [79, 80] (see also J. Schwarz’s lectures). We will also
see in section 5.1 that it follows from proposition 1 and mirror symmetry.
To embed SL(2, Z) into Γ5,21 we note that SL(2, Z) is the group of automorphisms of Z2 ,
which means that it is the group of isometries of a null lattice of rank two. We may split
Γ5,21 ∼
= Γ3,19 ⊕ Γ2,2 and then let the SL(2, Z) act on a null 2-plane in the Γ2,2 part. If we
46

u
u*

S6

S 10
H *(S)
0

H (S)

Figure 4: The S-dualities of the type IIB string.
identify Γ3,19 with H 2 (S, Z) then we see that the group of classical symmetries of the K3
surface (i.e., O(Γ3,19 )) commutes with S-duality. This is exactly what we desire from the
effective target space theory.
Now the shift of the axion is a shift in the H 0(S, Z) direction. Since O(Γ4,20 ) acts
transitively on primitive null vectors, we immediately see that any shift by an element of
Γ4,20 is a symmetry of the string theory. This is an analogue of the “integral B-field shift”.
That is, shifting any R-R modulus by an element of H ∗ (S, Z) is a symmetry of the string
theory.
The other generator of SL(2, Z) may be taken as one which exchanges the two null vectors
generating the null 2-plane in Γ2,2 . That is, we swap the axion direction, H 0 (S, Z), with u, a
null vector outside R4,20 . This is the exact analogue of mirror symmetry (which exchanged an
element of H 2 (S) with H 0 (S)). We have reduced the problem to one completely analogous
to finding the modular group for conformal field theories on a K3 surface. Thus we deduce
that we can generate all of O(Γ5,21 ) (as asserted first in [71]). Assuming the moduli space is
Hausdorff we have
Proposition 3 The moduli space of type IIB string theories compactified on a K3 surface
is
MIIB = O(Γ5,21 )\ O(5, 21)/(O(5) × O(21)).
(98)
This proposition depends on the S-duality conjecture for the type IIB string in ten dimensions, theorem 6, and the completeness and Hausdorff constraints.
47

We should mention that there is a strong-weak coupling duality in the resulting sixdimensional theory. Let u∗ be a null vector in Γ5,21 dual to u such that u and u∗ span the
Γ1,1 sublattice orthogonal to H ∗ (S, Z) ∼
= Γ4,20 . One of the elements in O(Γ5,21 ) exchanges u
∗
and u and has the effect of reversing the sign of the six-dimensional dilaton. Note that this is
not at all the same as the element of O(Γ5,21 ) which changed the sign of the ten-dimensional
dilaton as the latter exchanged u with H 0 (S, Z) as shown in figure 4. In general an S-duality
in a given number of dimensions will not give rise to an S-duality in a lower number of
dimensions upon compactification. In the type IIB string however, we see S-duality in both
six and ten dimensions.
The behaviour of the type IIA and type IIB string can be contrasted. The stronglycoupled type IIA string on a K3 surface is dual to a different string theory (the heterotic
string) which is weakly-coupled. The type IIB strongly-coupled string on a K3 surface is
dual to a weakly-coupled version of itself.
Finally in this section let us mention some strange properties of the type IIB string on
a K3 surface. We know that when the type IIA string is compactified on an orbifold with
B=0 then an enhanced gauge symmetry appears. This indicated some divergence within
the underlying conformal field theory. It should be true therefore that a type IIB string
compactified on the same space must have some interesting nonperturbative physics since it
is associated with the same divergent conformal field theory. It was explained in [74] that
these new theories are associated with massless string-like solitons which appear at these
points in the moduli space.

5

Four-Dimensional Theories

Now let us explore what happens when we compactify string theories down to four dimensions. This process need not involve a K3 surface in general but we will find that in all the
easy cases K3 surfaces will be present in abundance!

5.1

N = 4 theories

Supersymmetries are not chiral in four dimensions and so, in contrast to the six-dimensional
case, there is only one kind of N = 4 theory.
The local holonomy algebra must be u(4) ∼
= u(1) ⊕ su(4) ∼
= u(1) ⊕ so(6). There are two
types of N = 4 supermultiplet in four dimensions which contain moduli fields:
1. The supergravity multiplet contains the dilaton-axion field which is a complex object
under the u(1) holonomy.
2. Matter multiplets each contain 6 real massless scalars which transform as a 6 of so(6).

48

Thus the moduli space must factorize into a product of a complex plane, for the dilatonaxion, times the space parametrized by the moduli coming from the matter multiplets. Thus,
given the assumption concerning completeness, the Teichmüller space may be written in the
form
O(6, m)
SL(2)
×
,
(99)
O(6) × O(m)
U(1)
where m is the number of matter multiplets.
A very simple way to arrive at this theory is to compactify a heterotic string on a 6-torus.
The first factor of (99) is then clearly the moduli space of the conformal field theories on the
torus with 6 left-moving dimensions and 22 right-moving dimensions — that is, m = 22. The
SL(2)/ U(1) term then comes from the dilaton-axion system: the dilaton being the string
dilaton as usual and the axion from dualizing the B-field to obtain a scalar.
The type IIA string may be compactified on K3 × T 2 to obtain an N=4 theory too. The
conformal field theory on a K3 has 80 real deformations and for T 2 it has 4 deformations. The
1-form R-R field gives b1 (K3×T 2 ) = 2 moduli and the 1-form R-R field gives b3 (K3×T 2 ) = 44
moduli. The 3-form may also be compactified down to a 2-form in b1 (K3 × T 2 ) = 2 ways and
then dualized to give 2 more scalars. Adding the dilaton-axion we have 80+4+2+44+2+2 =
134. This implies m = 22 again. Actually proposition 1 tells us that this must be the same
theory as the heterotic string on a 6-torus.
Let us examine the moduli space of conformal field theories on a 2-torus. As far as the
Teichmüller space is concerned we have
SL(2) SL(2)
O(2, 2)
∼
×
,
=
O(2) × O(2)
U(1)
U(1)

(100)

up to Z2 identifications. One of the SL(2)/ U(1) factors may be regarded as the complex
structure of the torus and the other SL(2)/ U(1) factor represents the Kähler form and Bfield on the torus. We refer to [63] for a review of this. What does the second factor in (99)
represent? There are many ways of approaching this problem. Here we use a trick following
[81] that will come in use later on.
Begin with a six-dimensional field theory given by the heterotic string compactified on a
4-torus. The effective field theory in six dimensions will be roughly of the form
Z
√
S = d6 X g6 e−2Φ6,Het (R + . . .)
(101)
Now compactify over a 2-torus of area AHet (as measured by the heterotic string).
Z
√
S = d4 X g4 e−2Φ6,Het AHet (R + . . .)
=
=

Z

Z

d4 X

√

g4 e−2Φ4,Het (R + . . .),

d4 X

√

g4 AIIA (R + . . .),
49

(102)

where AIIA is the area of the 2-torus when we consider building the same theory by compactifying the type IIA string on K3 × T 2 . We have made use of (93) to derive this. Looking
at the second line of (102) we see that the area of the T 2 is actually playing the rôle of the
coupling constant. Thus, in going from the heterotic string description of the situation to
the type IIA description of the same situation, the dilaton of the heterotic string has been
replaced by the area of the T 2 of the type IIA string. Thus, the SL(2)/ U(1) factor in (99)
must represent the Kähler form and B-field of the 2-torus in the type IIA picture.
We know from conformal field theory that SL(2, Z) acts on the SL(2)/ U(1) part of
the Teichmüller space giving the Kähler form and B-field of the 2-torus. Combining this
knowledge with what we found from the heterotic string, we see that O(Γ6,22 ) × SL(2, Z)
acts as the modular group for our N = 4 theory.
Proposition 4 The type IIA string compactified on K3 × T 2 is equivalent to the heterotic
string compactified on a 6-torus and they form the moduli space
MN =4 = (O(Γ6,22 )\ O(6, 22)/(O(6) × O(22))) × (SL(2, Z)\ SL(2)/ U(1)) .

(103)

This rests on the same assumptions as proposition 3.16
The SL(2, Z) factor of the modular group acts as an S-duality in the effective fourdimensional theory. Thus we have derived, from proposition 1 the existence of MontonenOlive S-duality [83, 84, 85] for N = 4 theories in four dimensions. (Again we are going to
neglect to discuss solitons — see [82] for such analysis.)
Lastly we may consider the type IIB string compactified on K3 × T 2 . Again there are
a multitude of ways of arriving at the desired result. One of the easiest ways is to take
following proposition from [86, 87]:
Proposition 5 The type IIA superstring and type IIB superstring compactified down to nine
dimensions on a circle are equivalent except that the radii of the circles are inversely related.
One also needs to shift the dilaton of one theory relative to the other to achieve the same
target space effective field theory for the two string theories.
Thus, since the T 2 of K3 × T 2 contains a circle, the type IIB theory compactified on
K3×T 2 can also be bundled into proposition 4. Note that an R ↔ 1/R transformation on one
of the circles in the T 2 is a mirror map in the sense that the notions of deformation of complex
structure and complexified Kähler form are interchanged. Thus, the SL(2, Z)\ SL(2)/ U(1)
factor in the moduli space in (103) represents the complex structure moduli space of the
2-torus in the case of the type IIB string.
16

Depending on one’s tastes, in the case of the moduli space of the heterotic string on a 6-torus one may
wish to consider this statement as more fundamental than proposition 1 as it may be analyzed directly in
terms of solitons [82].

50

Thus the SL(2, Z)\ SL(2)/ U(1) factor in the moduli space in (103) can play 3 rôles
[88, 89]:
1. The dilaton-axion variable in the case of the heterotic string.
2. The area and B-field of the 2-torus in the case of the type IIA string.
3. The complex structure of the 2-torus in the case of the type IIB string.
Comparing the heterotic string to the type IIA string in this setup may be regarded as
fairly profound. The dilaton of the heterotic string, i.e., the coupling of the space-time field
theory, is mapped to an area in the type IIA theory, i.e., the coupling of the world-sheet field
theory. Thus, in a sense we are mapping the space-time field theory associated to one string
theory to the world-sheet field theory associated to another. One might take this as evidence
that neither the target space point of view nor the world-sheet point of view of string theory
may be regarded as more fundamental than the other since they may be exchanged.
The SL(2, Z) S-duality of the type IIB string in ten dimensions is now sitting in the group
O(Γ6,22 ). In fact, the above analysis can be used to “prove” the existence of this S-duality
group. This can be viewed as an analogue of the deduction of this same S-duality group
from M-theory as was done in [79, 80].
Note that we can play the same game as in section 4.3 to find the enhanced gauge groups.
In this case we have a space-like 6-plane in Γ6,22 ⊗Z R and we look for roots perpendicular
to this plane. The gauge group is always of rank 28.

5.2

More N = 4 theories

Does the moduli space (103) represent all possible N = 4 theories in four dimensions? It
seems unlikely as one expects to be able to build theories with a gauge group of rank < 28.
Consider compactification of the type II string. All we demand to obtain the desired theory
in four dimensions is that the manifold on which we compactify have SU(2) holonomy. The
only complex surface with SU(2) holonomy is a K3 surface. We have more possibilities in
complex dimension three however. Thus we expect that the moduli spaces we discussed in
section 4 to give the complete story for N = 2 theories in six dimensions but we are not
done yet for N = 4 theories in four dimensions.
Note that this is a similar statement to the one that Seiberg gave using anomalies [50].
When using a conformal field theory to compactify a ten-dimensional theory to six dimensions
one may consider the case of a type IIB string compactified to a chiral N = (2, 0) sixdimensional theory and analyze the anomalies. The Hodge numbers of a K3 surface are
found to be necessary for a consistent theory.
We should add that one can find further theories in six dimensions if one is willing to
drop the requirement that the compactification has some conformal field theory description
(and switching to something like M-theory instead). See [90] for an example.
51

Let us consider how to build a complex threefold with holonomy SU(2). First we note the
existence of a covariantly-constant holomorphic 2-form and thus h2,0 = 1. The Dolbeault
index [9] may then be used to establish h1,0 = 1. Thus our manifold cannot be simplyconnected. Now we may use the Cheeger–Gromoll theorem [91] which tells us that the
universal cover of the manifold is isometric to M × Rn for some compact simply-connected
manifold, M. It is clear that we require that the universal cover to be K3 × R2 . In other
words, any complex threefold with holonomy SU(2) is isometric to K3 × T 2 or some quotient
thereof.
To build more N = 4 theories we will consider compactifying type II strings on a quotient
of K3 × T 2 . This quotient must of course preserve the global SU(2) holonomy and thus any
element of the quotienting group must preserve the holomorphic 2-form on the K3 surface.
Any such action has fixed points on the K3 surface. Thus, to avoid getting a quotient
singularity, any such action on the K3 surface must be accompanied by a translation on the
T 2 . That is, the quotienting group must have translations in R2 as a faithful representation.
An immediate consequence is that the quotienting group must be abelian.
The classification of such groups, G, has been done by Nikulin [92] and we list the results
in table 3. M is the rank of the maximal sublattice of H 2 (K3, Z) that transforms nontrivially
under G.
This action of G on Γ6,22 ∼
= Γ4,20 ⊕ Γ2,2 is now determined. Firstly, the action on K3 is
a geometric symmetry and so must preserve w and w ∗ . The K3 part of the action is then
determined by the action on H 2 (K3, Z) ∼
= Γ3,19 ⊂ Γ4,20 For the explicit form of the action
2
on the lattice H (K3, Z) we refer the reader to [93]. Lastly we need the action on Γ2,2 . This
encodes the action of G on T 2 which we require to be a translation. We also want this
action to be geometric and therefore left-right symmetric. This forces the shift to be a null
direction. This is sufficient to determine the shift up to isomorphism.
Now that we know the action of G on Γ6,22 we may copy the description of the quotienting
procedure over into the heterotic string picture. The result is that we are now describing an
asymmetric orbifold of a heterotic string on T 6 . Such objects were first analyzed in [94]. An
asymmetric orbifold is an string-theory orbifold in which the left-movers and right-movers
of the conformal field theory are not treated identically. Because of this the geometric
description of the quotienting process in terms of target space geometry is obscure. Also the
chiral nature of quotienting can produce anomalies. One manifestation of this can be lack
of modular invariance of the resulting conformal field theory.
Let us consider an asymmetric orbifold of a toroidal theory built on a lattice Λ. Consider
an element of the quotienting group, g ∈ G, and represent it as a rotation of the lattice
G
M

Z2
8

Z2 × Z2
12

Z2 × Z4
16

Z2 × Z6
18

Z3
12

Z3 × Z3
16

Z4
14

Z4 × Z4
18

Table 3: Nikulin’s K3 quotienting groups.
52

Z5
16

Z6
16

Z7
18

Z8
18

followed by a shift, δ ∈ Λ⊗Z R. Let the eigenvalues of the rotation be of the form exp(2πi.rj ).
A necessary condition for modular invariance is that [94, 95]


|g|  14

X
j



rj (1 − rj ) + 21 δ.δ  ∈ Z;

∀g ∈ G,

(104)

where |g| is the order of g. One may check the groups in table 3 and show that this condition
is indeed satisfied in every case.
Did we have the right to expect that (104) should be satisfied for all the groups in table
3? To this author the result seems a little mysterious. Indeed, it is the case that if one
considers quotients which destroy the N = 4 supersymmetry then one need not be so lucky
[96, 97]. For now though, since we are concerned with N = 4 theories at this point, we
may content ourselves with the knowledge that the anomalies appear to be looking after
themselves and press on.
Now let us determine the moduli space. Firstly any deformation of the original theory of
the type II string on K3 × T 2 or the heterotic string on T 6 which is invariant under G will be
a deformation of the resulting quotient. Secondly we need to worry in string theory that we
may introduce some “twisted marginal operators” — that is, massless modes associated with
fixed points. Since there are no fixed points of G (at least in the type II picture) we may
ignore the latter possibility. To obtain the first type of deformation we may simply restrict
attention to the invariant sublattice ΛG ⊂ Γ6,22 under (the rotation part of) G. Note that
all of the space-like directions of Γ6,22 are not rotated by G and so the resulting invariant
sublattice, ΛG , will have signature (6, m), where m = 22 − M from table 3.
What we have done is to build a moduli space of the form
O(ΛG )\ O(6, m)/(O(6) × O(m)),

(105)

of an N = 4 theory in four dimensions which we viewed either as a type IIA string on a
freely-acting quotient of K3 × T 2 or an asymmetric orbifold of a heterotic string on T 6 .
Are there any further possibilities beyond those listed in table 3? We restricted ourselves
to classical symmetries of the K3 surface. There should certainly be more symmetries from
the stringy geometry of the K3 surface when it is Planck-sized. One may also look at
M-theory to provide more possibilities. We refer the reader to [93, 98] for further discussion.
Although (105) looks suspiciously like a Narain moduli space for a heterotic string on a
torus, it is important to notice that ΛG is, in general, not self-dual. Any attempt to describe
this theory in a straight forward way as a toroidal compactification is doomed as it would
imply that the theory is not modular invariant.
On a similar point we have to be careful when considering which enhanced gauge groups
can appear. One can view the moduli space as a Grassmannian of space-like 6-planes in
R6,m but it is no longer the case that only elements, v ∈ ΛG , perpendicular to this 6-plane
with v.v = −2 will give massless vector fields. The simplest way to approach the question
53

Bn
Cn
F4
G2
Figure 5: Quotients of simply-laced groups.
of enhanced gauge groups is as follows (see [99, 100] for the original analysis in terms of
heterotic strings). Consider the original theory before we divide by G. In this case, we know
what the roots of the enhanced gauge group are, given the space-like 6-plane. As G has a
nontrivial action on the lattice Γ6,22 , it may also act on the roots of the gauge group. Since
our desired theory is the invariant part of the original theory under the quotient by G, the
resulting gauge group will be the invariant part of the original gauge group under the action
of the discrete group G.
The problem we have therefore is as follows. Given a simply-laced gauge group and an
action of a discrete group, G, on the roots of this gauge group, find the subgroup of the
gauge group which is invariant under this action. This will be the enhanced gauge group of
the desired quotient theory. Fortunately this is a well-known problem in Lie group theory
(see, for example, exercise 22.24 in [29]). The outer automorphism of the group, given by an
action on the roots can be written as a symmetry of the Dynkin diagram in the obvious way.17
The results are shown in figure 5 and show that non-simply-laced Lie groups can result. In
particular one may show that any Lie group (of sufficiently small rank) can appear as an
enhanced gauge symmetry.
Lastly let us note an important point about the N = 4 moduli spaces. This is that
they are disconnected from each other as shown in figure 6. If components of the moduli
space with different values of m were to touch each other then, at such a point of contact,
we would have a theory with very special properties. As one approached such a theory
from within the interior of one of the regions, extra states would become massless to furnish
17

Except for the case of su(2n + 1) in which case the outer automorphism yields so(2n + 1) as the invariant
subalgebra.

54

...

m=10
m=22

m=14

Figure 6: The moduli space of N = 4 theories.
the deformations into the other region. This does not happen according to the conformal
field description of either the heterotic string or the type II strings. Thus it would appear
unreasonable to expect it to occur in the full string theory. This is to be contrasted with
the behaviour of N = 2 theories in four dimensions, as we discuss in section 5.7.

5.3

Generalities for N = 2 theories

Now that we have understood the main features of the moduli space of N = 4 theories in
four dimensions we are ready to embark on a study of the much richer field of N = 2 theories.
Much of the recent interest in duality was sparked by Seiberg and Witten’s work on N = 2
Yang-Mills field theory [101, 102]. Here we are hoping to analyze full string theory in the
same context. Thus we expect the subject to be at least as rich as Seiberg-Witten theory. In
the short period that N = 2 theories have been studied in the context of string duality, the
subject is already vast and it will be difficult to do justice to it here. As in the rest of these
lectures, we will attempt to confine our attention to matters related to the moduli space of
theories.
How can we obtain an N = 2 theory in four dimensions from string theory? Two
answers immediately appear given the usual holonomy argument. Firstly one may take a
heterotic string theory in ten dimensions and compactify it on a complex threefold with
SU(2) holonomy. We have already discussed such manifolds in section 5.2 and found that
they are of the form K3 × T 2 , or some free quotient thereof. Secondly one might take a type
II string and compactify it on a complex threefold of SU(3) holonomy, i.e., a Calabi–Yau
manifold. Given the story for N = 4 theories above it is tempting to conjecture that there
may be dual pairs of such theories. That is, we wish that a heterotic string when compactified
in a specific way on K3 × T 2 be physically equivalent to a type II string compactified on a
Calabi–Yau threefold. This story began with the papers of [103, 96] and, as we shall see,
the full picture is still to be uncovered.
There is one immediately apparent curiosity which is associated with such a conjecture.
This is that there are a very large number of topological classes of Calabi–Yau threefolds.
The exact number is not known since a classification remains elusive. Indeed, one cannot
rule out the possibility that the number is infinite. Contrasted to this are the few manifolds
of K3 × T 2 and its quotients. At first it might appear that only a tiny fraction of the type
55

II compactifications can have heterotic partners. This argument is flawed, however, as the
heterotic string requires more data to specify its class than just the topology of the space
on which it is compactified.
The heterotic string in ten dimensions has a gauge group which is either E8 × E8 or
Spin(32)/Z2 . Let us consider the E8 × E8 string for purposes of discussion. This “primordial” gauge group must be compactified in addition to the extra dimensions. The generally
accepted way to do this is to take a vector bundle E → X over the compactification manifold, X, with a structure group contained in E8 × E8 . The embedding of this structure group
into the heterotic string’s gauge group then gives a recipe for compactifying the heterotic
string on X including the gauge degrees of freedom.
This is exactly what we were doing in section 3.5. In the case of a heterotic string
we considered a rank 16 principal U(1)16 -bundle over a torus. The structure group was
embedded as the Cartan subgroup of E8 ×E8 and the connection on the bundle was specified
by the parameters of the matrix A. The equations of motion demand that A be a constant
and so the bundle is flat. The Narain moduli space then gives the full moduli space of such
flat vector bundles on a torus.
In the case of compactification over a more general manifold, one way of solving the
equations of motion [104] is to demand that the vector bundle be holomorphic and that the
curvature satisfies
g i̄ Fi̄ = 0.
(106)
One also requires c1 (E) ∈ H 2 (X, 2Z) and that
c2 (E) = c2 (TX ),

(107)

for anomaly cancelation. Clearly the torus fits into this picture if we replace the principal
U(1)16 -bundle by the associated sum of holomorphic line bundles.
The analysis of this bundle for the case of a heterotic string on a K3 surface is going to be
much harder than the toroidal case because now the bundle cannot be flat as it must satisfy
c2 (E) = 24.18 We can see hope then that the large number of choices of possible Calabi–Yau
manifolds for compactification of the type II string might be matched by the large number
of choices of suitable bundles over K3 × T 2 for the heterotic string compactification.
It will take a fairly long argument before we are able to give an explicit example of such
a pair so we will discuss the situation in general first. Let us start in our usual way by
thinking about the holonomy of the moduli space. For an N = 2 theory in four dimensions
the holonomy algebra is u(2) ∼
= u(1) ⊕ sp(1). There are two types of N = 2 supermultiplet
which contain massless scalars:
1. The vector multiplets each contain 2 real fields which form a complex object under the
u(1) holonomy.
18

As is common, we assume integration over the base K3 surface in this notation.

56

2. The hypermultiplets each contain 4 real massless scalars which transform as a quaternionic object under the sp(1) holonomy.
Thus, at least away from points where the manifold structure may break down, we expect
the moduli space to be in the form of a product
MN =2 = MV × MH ,

(108)

where MV is a Kähler manifold spanned by moduli in vector supermultiplets and MH is a
quaternionic Kähler manifold spanned by moduli in hypermultiplets. It can be shown [105]
that MH is not hyperkähler.
The effective four-dimensional theory always contains a dilaton-axion system. This will
govern the string-coupling. As it plays such an important rôle we will look first at whether
the dilaton-axion lives in a hypermultiplet or a vector multiplet. One way to do this is
simply to count the dimensions of the moduli space and use the fact that MV has an even
number of real dimensions and MH has a multiple of four dimensions. For a more direct
way of justifying which kind of supermultiplet the dilaton-axion lives in see [97].
Consider first the type IIA superstring on a Calabi–Yau manifold X. First consider
the moduli space of underlying conformal field theories (see, for example, [40] for a full
discussion). We have h1,1 (X) complex dimensions of moduli space coming from the deformations of Kähler form and B-field and we have h2,1 (X) complex dimensions coming
from deformations of complex structure. The R-R sector moduli come from a 3-form giving
b3 (X) = 2(h2,1 (X) + 1) real deformations. Finally we have 2 real deformations given by the
dilaton-axion. Given that h1,1 (X) and h2,1 (X) can be even or odd, the only way to arrange
these deformations in a way consistent with the dimensionality of the moduli space is to
arrange:
• There are h1,1 (X) vector supermultiplets.
• There are h2,1 (X) + 1 hypermultiplets, one of which contains the dilaton-axion.
Next consider the type IIB superstring compactified on a Calabi–Yau manifold, Y . The
moduli space of conformal field theories is as for the type IIA string with h1,1 (Y ) complex
deformations of complexified Kähler form and h2,1 complex deformations of complex structure. The R-R moduli consist of one from the 0-form, b2 (Y ) = h1,1 (Y ) from the 2-form,
b4 (Y ) = h1,1 (Y ) from the self-dual 4-form and one more from dualizing the 2-form. Lastly
we have two more moduli from the dilaton-axion. Now we are forced to arrange as follows.
• There are h2,1 (Y ) vector supermultiplets.
• There are h1,1 (Y ) + 1 hypermultiplets, one of which contains the dilaton-axion.

57

Note that the type IIA picture and the type IIB picture are related by an exchange
h1,1 (X) ↔ h2,1 (Y )

h2,1 (X) ↔ h1,1 (Y ).

(109)

If we have a pair of Calabi–Yau varieties, X and Y , such that type IIA string theory compactified on X is equivalent to type IIB string theory on Y then we may use this as definition
of the statement that “X and Y are a mirror pair”. See [106] for further discussion of this
point.
Lastly we consider the heterotic string compactified on a product of a K3 surface and
a 2-torus. First let us assume that there are no nasty obstructions in the moduli space
and we can count the number of deformations of the K3 surface, the bundle over the K3
surface, the 2-torus, and the bundle over the 2-torus and simply sum the result. There
are 80 deformations of the K3 surface as far as conformal field theory is concerned and the
resulting moduli space is a quaternionic Kähler manifold. It was shown by Mukai [107] that
the moduli space of holomorphic vector bundles over the K3 will be hyperkähler. Thus
it appears very reasonable to expect that the complete moduli space coming from the K3
surface will be a quaternionic Kähler manifold. Certainly its dimension is a multiple of four
assuming unobstructedness. The moduli space coming from the torus will be locally of the
form O(2, m)/(O(2) × O(m)) and has an even number of dimensions. Thus we assemble the
supermultiplets as follows
• The vector multiplets come from the 2-torus, together with its bundle, and the dilatonaxion.
• The hypermultiplets are associated to the K3 surface, together with its bundle.
Note that we are assuming we can give simple geometric interpretations to all the moduli.
We will see later that there may be other vector or hypermultiplet moduli we have not
included in the above lists.

5.4

K3 fibrations

Suppose we are able to find a pair of theories, one a type II string on a Calabi–Yau manifold
and the other a heterotic string theory compactified over some bundle on K3 × T 2 . The first
thing one would do would be to line up the moduli spaces of the two theories so that the
parameters of one theory could be understood in terms of the other. We begin by analyzing
what would happen in the case of the vector multiplet moduli space. The is the first step
required before we can actually propose a dual pair of such theories. We now follow an
argument first presented in [108].

58

For definiteness we choose a type IIA string rather than a type IIB. The reason for this
is that we will ultimately be able to tie our analysis to proposition 1, which was also phrased
in terms of the type IIA string.
The holonomy argument leads to a factorization of the moduli space, which in turn has
another consequence given the fact that all the matter fields are related to the moduli by
supersymmetry. This is that the couplings between fields in the vector multiplets can only
depend on the moduli from the vector multiplets and the couplings between fields in the
hypermultiplets can only be affected by the moduli from the hypermultiplets. This may also
be deduced directly from the supergravity Lagrangian [109].
Let us consider just the moduli space, MV , coming from the scalars in the vector multiplets. We know this is a complex Kähler manifold. Further analysis of the supergravity
Lagrangian puts more constraints on the geometry of the moduli space [110]. A manifold
satisfying these extra conditions is called “special Kähler”.19 The main importance of special
Kähler geometry is the fact that all the information we require about the theory is encoded in
a single holomorphic function F on the moduli space. If we use specific complex coordinates,
the “special coordinates”, on the moduli space, the metric is of the form
∂F ∂F
K = − log 2(F + F) − (q − q̄ )
− ı̄
∂q i
∂ q̄
i

∂K
gi̄ = i ̄ .
∂q ∂ q̄

ı̄

!!

(110)

When viewed from the point of view of the heterotic string, we expect the dilaton-axion
to be contained in this moduli space. Let us suppose for the time being that all the other
moduli can be understood from the world-sheet perspective of the heterotic string. This
should mean that we have a moduli space of conformal field theories spanning all but one
of the complex directions in the moduli space with the extra dimension being given by
the dilaton-axion system. In the limit that the string coupling becomes very small, i.e., the
dilaton approaches −∞, we expect that the moduli space as described by the conformal field
theory becomes exact. Thus, in the limit of small dilaton, the moduli space should factorize
into a product of the moduli space of conformal field theories, and the extra bit spanned by
the dilaton-axion. In [112] precisely this problem was analyzed. It was discovered that the
only way a special Kähler manifold could factorize was if it became locally a product of the
form
O(2, m)
SL(2)
×
.
(111)
O(2) × O(m)
U(1)

This of course is excellent news. The first term in (111) looks suspiciously like the Narain
moduli space for a 2-torus and the second term looks like a dilaton-axion. This is exactly
19

The quaternionic Kähler manifold parametrized by the hypermultiplets is also subject to extra constraints [111].

59

what we wanted. Note that the form (111) is only expected in the limit that the dilaton
approaches −∞. Away from this limit we expect the two factors to begin to interfere with
each other.
Now we want to carry this information over to the type IIA compactification on the
Calabi–Yau manifold, X. All of the vector multiplet moduli are expected to be associated
to deformations of the Kähler form and B-field on X. Let us fix some notation. In contrast
to the K3 surface, degrees of freedom of the Kähler form and the B-field for the Calabi–
Yau threefold, X, can be nicely paired-up. Introduce a basis of divisors, or 4-cycles, {Dk },
spanning H4 (X, Z), where k = 0, . . . , h1,1 (X) − 1. Dual to the dual of these divisors we have
a basis of 2-forms, {ek }, generating H 2 (X, Z).20 Expand out the Kähler form and B-field as
B + iJ =

h1,1
−1
X

(Bk + iJk )ek ,

(112)

k=0

for real numbers Bk , Jk . We will take e0 to correspond to the generator associated to the
direction in moduli space given by the heterotic dilaton-axion.
Our information for the heterotic side is in terms of the local form of the moduli space.
Thanks to special Kähler geometry we can translate this into information concerning couplings between certain fields. The fields we are interested in are the superpartners of the
moduli of the vector superfields — i.e., the gauginos, the vector bosons and the moduli
themselves. One may consider couplings in the effective action of the form of “Yukawa couplings”, i.e., κijk = hai ψj ψk i, or other terms equivalent by supersymmetry. It was shown in
[113] that, to leading order in the non-linear σ-model, the coupling between three fields is
given by
κijk = #(Di ∩ Dj ∩ Dk ),
(113)
where the D’s are the divisors in X associated to the fields. The reader is also referred to
[114] for an account of this.21 It is also known from special Kähler geometry that
κijk =

∂F
.
∂qi ∂qj ∂qk

(114)

We now have some approximate knowledge about both the heterotic string and the type
IIA string. In the case of the heterotic string we know that, in the small dilaton limit, the
moduli space factorizes in the form (111) and in the case of the type IIA string, we know
that, in the small α′ /R2 limit, the couplings are of the form (113). We can make a useful
statement about a heterotic-type II dual pair if both of these approximations happen to be
simultaneously true. Note that, for the heterotic string, the dilaton lies in a vector multiplet
20

For simplicity let us assume all cohomology is torsion-free.
Note that [114] explicitly refers to a heterotic string compactified on a Calabi–Yau manifold whereas we
are considering a type IIA string. Most of the calculations are unaffected however.
21

60

and that, in the type IIA string, the size parameters lie in vector multiplets. Thus we wish
to assert that the moduli spaces of the theories are aligned in the right way so that as the
dilaton in the heterotic string approaches −∞, some size in the Calabi–Yau space on which
the type IIA string is compactified is becoming very large.
To picture this presumed aligning of the moduli spaces it is best to picture exactly what
makes corrections to the approximations we are considering. In the case of the heterotic
string, corrections arise from instantons in the Seiberg-Witten theory [101]. The action of
such an instanton becomes very large, and hence the contribution to any physical quantity
becomes very small, when the dilaton becomes close to −∞. In the case of the non-linear
σ-model, corrections come from world-sheet instantons [115]. A world-sheet instanton takes
the form of a holomorphic map from the world-sheet into the target space. We will be
interested only in tree-level effects and so as far as we are considered world-sheet instantons
are rational curves. The action for such an instanton is simply the area of the curve. Thus
the effect of an instanton gets weaker as the Kähler form is varied so as to make the rational
curve bigger.
The picture one should have mind therefore is that as the heterotic dilaton is decreased
down to −∞, some rational curve (or some set or family of rational curves) is getting bigger.
The important thing is that no curve should shrink down during this process.
Let us assume we are now at the edge of our moduli space where, in the type IIA
interpretation, all of the rational curves are very large compared to α′ . Thus, by assumption,
the heterotic string’s dilaton is close to −∞. We can take the moduli space given by (111)
and deduce the form of F. We may then translate this into a statement about κijk and thus
about the topology of X from (113). The result is that [112]
#(D0 ∩ D0 ∩ D0 ) = 0
#(D0 ∩ D0 ∩ Di ) = 0,
#(D0 ∩ Di ∩ Dj ) = ηij ,

i = 1, . . . , h1,1 − 1

(115)

i, j = 1 . . . , h1,1 − 1,

where ηij is a matrix of nonzero determinant and signature (+, −, −, . . . , −).
Suppose that X is such that there is some smooth complex surface embedded in X whose
class, as a divisor, is D0 . From (115) we see that D0 ∩ D0 = 0 and so the normal bundle
for this surface is trivial. It then follows from the adjunction formula, and the fact that X
is a Calabi–Yau space, that the tangent bundle for this surface has trivial c1 . Thus, the
surface representing D0 must either be a K3 surface or an algebraic 4-torus (also known as
an “abelian surface”). The fact that the normal bundle is trivial also suggests that the K3
or abelian surface can be “moved” parallel to itself to sweep out the entire space X. That
is, X is a fibration where the generic fibre is either a K3 surface or an abelian surface.
We can make the above more rigorous by appealing to a theorem by Oguiso [116] which
states that
61

Theorem 7 Let X be a minimal Calabi–Yau threefold. Let D be a nef divisor on X. If the
numerical D-dimension of D equals one then there is a fibration Φ : X → W , where W is
P1 and the generic fibre is either a K3 surface or an abelian surface.
The numerical D-dimension of a divisor is the maximal number of times it may be intersected
with itself to produce something nontrivial. We see above that D0 has D-dimension equal
to one. The statement that D is “nef” is the assertion that for any algebraic curve, C ⊂ X,
we have that
#(D ∩ C) ≥ 0, ∀C ⊂ X.
(116)
We can come very close to proving that D0 is nef following our assumption about the way
that moduli spaces are aligned. The special coordinates on a our moduli space of type IIA
string theories may be written in the form
qk = e2πi(Bk +iJk ) .

(117)

We are in an area of moduli space where all qk ≪ 1. The contribution of a curve, C, to the
instanton sum will then scale roughly as
1,1
hY

#(Dk ∩C)

qk

.

(118)

k=1

Clearly, if C is not nef then negative powers of qk appear and the instanton sum will fail to
converge, in contradiction to expectation.
 The above argument that C is nef is not actually complete. When one computes the instanton sum, one
also has to compute the coefficient in front of the monomial of the form (118). This can be done using
the methods discussed in [117, 118]. In the simple case of an isolated curve, the coefficient is simply one
(although extra contributions arise from multiple covers). C may not always be isolated however. One
may be able to deform C into a whole family of rational curves. In this case the coefficient might be
zero. One cannot then rule out that #(D ∩ C) < 0 as the field theory is simply unaffected by C.

An example of a case where rational curves don’t count in this way is that of N = 4 theories. Compactifying the type IIA string on K3 × T 2 , there are no instanton corrections but the K3 surface may contain
rational curves. Each rational curve will clearly be in the form of a family C × T 2 inside K3 × T 2 . An
algebraic surface of the form P1 × T 2 is known as an “elliptic scroll”.22 Since the calculation in [117, 118]
is essentially local we may generalize this result to any N = 2 Calabi–Yau compactification. That is we
claim that rational curves in an elliptic scroll do not contribute to the instanton sum. Note that rational
curves in a K3 surface are unstable in the sense that a generic deformation of complex structure of the
K3 surface will kill them. The work of Wilson [119] showed that essentially the same is true for elliptic
scrolls in Calabi–Yau manifolds. Thus, if we choose a generic complex structure on the Calabi–Yau
manifold then there will be no curves lying in an elliptic scroll.
If we assume that the only curves contributing zero to the instanton sum lie in an elliptic scroll then we
may complete our proof that D0 is nef by choosing a generic complex structure. We do not know if this
assumption is valid but it seems reasonable.

22

An “elliptic curve” is the algebraic geometer’s name for an algebraic curve of genus 1.

62

Note that the fibration Φ : X → W is allowed to “degenerate” at a finite number of
points in W . Indeed, if this were not the case then X could not be a Calabi–Yau variety.
Note that the degenerate fibre need not be some degenerate limit of a K3 surface. It could
be a perfectly smooth manifold (which is neither a K3 or abelian surface).
Finally we would like to know if the generic fibre is a K3 surface or an abelian surface.
We can determine this by finding c2 , and hence the Euler characteristic, of the fibre. This
may be determined by using the holomorphic anomaly of [120]. The result is that the Euler
characteristic of the generic fibre is 24 and so the fibration is of the K3 type. We refer the
reader to [108] for details of this calculation.
We thus arrive at the following:
Proposition 6 Given a dual pair of theories, one of which is a heterotic string compactified
on K3 × T 2 (or some free quotient thereof ) and the other is a type IIA string compactified
on a Calabi–Yau manifold X, then if there is a region of moduli space in which both the
respective perturbation theories converge, then X must be of the form of a K3-fibration over
P1 .
This proposition depends upon our statement about zero contributions from rational curves
only arising from elliptic scrolls. The fact that the base of the fibration is a P1 may be
deduced from the fact that H 1 of the base injects23 into the total cohomology of X and that
X has b1 = 0.
Not only do we know that X is a K3 fibration, but we also know that the divisor D0 is
the generic K3 fibre. This tells us immediately which deformation of X corresponds to a
deformation of the heterotic dilaton — it is the component of the Kähler form that affects
the area of the curve dual to D0 .
Let us first assume that the K3-fibration of X has a global section. This means that as
well as the fibration map:
Φ : X → W,
(119)
we also have a holomorphic embedding
γ : W → X.

(120)

The image of this embedding is a rational curve in X. Clearly this curve is dual to D0 . Thus
the value of the dilaton in the heterotic string is given by the area of this rational curve.
The instanton sums converge as the dilaton approaches −∞ and as this rational curve gets
very large. Thus the weakly-coupled limit of the heterotic string is given by the limit of X
in which the base P1 swells up to infinite size.
Note that if the K3 fibration does not have a global section, but rather a multi-valued
section, we may play a similar game. In this case the multi-section will not define an
23

This follows from the Leray spectral sequence for a fibration.

63

embedding of the base P1 into X but rather an embedding of a multiple cover of X. Thus,
the algebraic curve within X whose area gives the heterotic dilaton will be of genus greater
than zero.
One should note that what we have discussed here for the N = 2 dual pairs is actually
very similar to the N = 4 case discussed above. In that case we had a type IIA string
compactified on K3 × T 2 or a quotient thereof. This space may be viewed as a smooth
K3-fibration over T 2 (that is, an elliptic curve). This fibration is trivial in the case that the
target space is K3 × T 2 but becomes nontrivial when we take a free quotient. We saw in
section 5.1 that the dilaton for the heterotic string is given by the area of the T 2 — i.e., the
size of the base of the fibration.
The general picture we see is the following. If we have a heterotic-type IIA dual pair in
four dimensions, we may expect that the type IIA string is compactified on
• a K3-fibration over a 2-torus in the case of N = 4 supersymmetry, or,
• a K3-fibration over a P1 in the case of N = 2 supersymmetry.
In either case, the area of the base of the fibration gives the value of the heterotic dilaton.
The link to proposition 1 is clear in the N = 4 case. For the N = 2 case we should
note that the K3 surface on which the heterotic string is compactified might be viewable
as an elliptic fibration itself — that is, a fibration over P1 with generic fibre given by a T 2 .
Thus the K3 × T 2 (or quotient thereof) upon which the heterotic string is compactified may
be viewed as an “abelian fibration” over P1 — i.e., a fibration over P1 with generic fibre
given by a T 4 . When viewed in this way the relationship between the N = 2 theories in
four dimensions given by the heterotic string and the type IIA string may be viewed as a
fibre-wise application of the duality of proposition 1.
Such “fibre-wise duality”, which was first suggested in [97], is a potentially very powerful
tool. It has been extended to fibre-wise mirror symmetry in [121] and has recently been
applied to the problem of mirror symmetry itself in [122]. Both of these developments deserve
to be covered here in some detail since they both have direct relevance to K3 surfaces, but
we do not have time to do so. We refer the reader to [123, 124] for more details of the latter
in the context of K3 surfaces.
Let us note that the general appearance of K3-fibrations in the area of heterotic-type
II duality was first noted in [125] where some naturalness arguments based on the work of
[126] were presented. It is interesting to note that in this context it was really the type IIB
string that being studied rather than the type IIA. This raises the question as to whether
the mirror of a K3 fibration is another K3 fibration, which again raises the possibility of
some fibre-wise duality argument.

64

Bad Fibre

D0

D0
Ci

Ci

Ba

W
Figure 7: X as a K3 fibration over W .

5.5

More enhanced gauge symmetries

So far we have identified one of the moduli lying in a vector multiplet. This is the dilatonaxion in the heterotic string, or the component of the complexified Kähler form associated
to the base of the K3-fibration on which the type IIA string is compactified. Now we wish
to turn our attention to some of the other vector multiplet moduli.
Let us first look at things from the type IIA perspective. We know that our Calabi–
Yau space, X, is a K3-fibration and we wish to analyze elements of H 2(X), or equivalently,
H4 (X). In general, given a fibration X → W , the cohomology of X may be determined from
the cohomology of the base together with the cohomology of the fibre. The mechanism by
which this happens is called a “spectral sequence”. We do not wish to get involved with the
technicalities of spectral sequences here and refer the reader to [127] for the general idea.
The result is that the contributions to H4 (X) are as follows (see figure 7):
1. The generic fibre, D0 , will generate an element of H4 (X).
2. Take an algebraic 2-cycle in the fibre, i.e., an element of H2 (D0 ) and use it to “sweep
out” a 4-cycle in X by transporting it around the base, W . Note that this 2-cycle
needs to be monodromy invariant for this to make sense. Thus the 2-cycle might be
an irreducible curve in D0 which is monodromy invariant or it may be the sum of two
curves which are interchanged under monodromy, etc.
3. When we have a bad fibre which is a reducible divisor in X, we may vary the volumes
of the components of this bad fibre independently. Thus such fibres will contribute
extra pieces to H4 (X).
The second class above is clearly generated by elements of the Picard group of the generic
fibre. A monodromy-invariant element of the group Ci will sweep out a divisor Di , where
65

Ci = D0 ∩ Di . Thus
#(D0 ∩ Di ∩ Dj )X = #((D0 ∩ Di ) ∩ (D0 ∩ Dj ))D0
= #(Ci ∩ Cj )D0 ,

(121)

where the subscript denotes the space within which we are considering the intersection theory.
This agrees very nicely with our earlier result of (115). We see that ηij is simply the natural
inner product of the monodromy-invariant part of the Picard lattice of the generic fibre.
As we mentioned in section 2.5, the Picard lattice has signature (+, −, −, . . . , −). When
we take the monodromy-invariant part we retain the positive eigenvalue as the Kähler form
restricted to the generic K3 fibre must be monodromy invariant and the generic fibre has
positive volume. Thus ηij has the correct signature.
Now consider the third class. We denote such an element by Ba . Since this class is
supported away from the generic fibre, we have D0 ∩ Ba = 0. Now comparing to (115) we
are in trouble. The moduli coming from such vector supermultiplets cannot live in the space
(111) we expected from the heterotic string. What can have gone wrong? The only place
our argument was flawed was in the perturbative analysis of the heterotic string. It turns
out that the classes Ba cannot be understood perturbatively from the perspective of the
heterotic string. We will encounter such objects later in section 6.2 but in this section we
will restrict our attention to perturbative questions.
We now know exactly how to interpret the Teichmüller space
SL(2)
O(2, m)
×
,
O(2) × O(m)
U(1)

(122)

both in terms of the heterotic string compactified on K3 × T 2 and its supposed type IIA
dual compactified on X. The second term comes from the heterotic dilaton-axion and the
complexified Kähler form associated to the class D0 ∈ H4 (X). The first term is considered
to be associated to the Narain moduli space of the heterotic string on T 2 , or, from what we
have just said, the complexified Kähler form on the (monodromy-invariant part of) the K3
fibre. We computed the stringy moduli space of the Kähler-form and B-field on an algebraic
K3 surface earlier and obtained the second term of (74). Fortunately it turns out to have
just the right form!
Note that we have reduced our problem once again to a comparison of a heterotic string
on a torus (this time a 2-torus) with a type IIA string on a K3 surface (this time an algebraic
fibre in X). We should be able to use the same old arguments we used in sections 4.3 and
5.2 to obtain the enhanced gauge group.
Let us first assume there is no monodromy acting on the Picard group of the K3 fibre for
X. We expect the slice of the moduli space coming from varying the complexified Kähler
form on the generic K3 fibre to be of the form
O(Υ)\ O(2, ρ)/(O(2) × O(ρ)),
66

(123)

where Υ is the quantum Picard lattice introduced in (70). Identifying this with the Narain
moduli space of T 2 that we expect to see in the weak-coupling limit of the heterotic string,
we see that the Narain lattice for the T 2 is isomorphic to Υ.24 That is, we have a gauge
bundle of rank ρ − 2 compactified over T 2 .
To obtain the enhanced gauge groups we take (123) to be the Grassmannian of space-like
2-planes in R2,ρ and look for points where the 2-plane becomes orthogonal to roots in the
lattice Υ. The roots will give the root diagram of the enhanced gauge group in the usual
way.
Let us clarify all this general discussion with an example taken from [103]. Let us take
X0 to be the hypersurface
z12 + z23 + z312 + z424 + z524 = 0,
(124)
in the weighted projective space P4{12,8,2,1,1} . The weighted projective space contains various
quotient singularities. We will blow these up and take the proper transform of X0 to be
X. There is a Z2 -quotient singularity along the locus [z1 , z2 , z3 , 0, 0]. We may blow this up,
replacing each point in the locus by P1 . The projection of X onto to this P1 will be the K3fibration. That is, roughly speaking, we view [z4 , z5 ] as the homogeneous coordinates of the
base W ∼
= P1 . To find the fibre fix a point in the base by fixing z4 /z5 . This projects P4{12,8,2,1,1}
onto the subspace P3{12,8,2,1} . Now P3{12,8,2,1} may be viewed as a Z2 -quotient of P3{6,4,1,1}
by taking z4 7→ −z4 . Such codimension quotients are equivalent to reparametrizations in
complex geometry and so the fibre may be taken to be the hypersurface
z12 + z23 + z312 + z412 = 0,

(125)

in the weighted projective space P3{6,4,1,1} . This is a K3 surface as expected. Note that we
still have a Z2 -quotient singularity in the fibre along [z1 , z2 , 0, 0]. This intersects the generic
K3 fibre at a single point. Thus for a smooth X we blow-up again to introduce a single
(−2)-curve into each generic fibre.
Now let us work out the Picard lattice of the generic fibre. A generic hyperplane in
3
P{6,4,1,1} may be written as az3 + bz4 = 0 for some a, b ∈ C. Any two such hyperplanes
will intersect at the point [z1 , z2 , 0, 0] but this is exactly where we are blowing up. Thus the
hyperplane doesn’t intersect itself at all but will intersect the (−2)-curve (i.e., the exceptional
divisor) once. The Picard lattice, for a generic value of complex structure of X, will be
generated by the hyperplane and the single (−2)-curve and has intersection matrix

24

0
1
1 −2

!

.

(126)

Note that there is no reason to expect that Υ should be self-dual. In many proposed dual pairs (e.g.,
some of those of [103]) it is not self-dual. On the heterotic side this says that the heterotic string on T 2 is
not modular invariant. We shall assume that modular invariance is satisfied once the K3 factor is taken into
account too. In general one might worry that strange effects such as those encountered in [96] might cause
problems with this. We will assume here that modular invariance looks after itself.

67

A simple change of basis shows that this is Γ1,1 ∼
= U. Note that neither the hyperplane nor
the exceptional (−2)-curve are effected by monodromy around W and so we needn’t worry
about monodromy invariance in this case.
The bad fibres occur when we fix a point on the base W such that z424 + z524 = 0. Thus,
at 24 points, we have fibres
z12 + z23 + z312 = 0,
(127)
in P3{6,4,1,1} . Although singular, this equation does not factorize and so the bad fibres are
irreducible. Thus there are no contributions to h1,1 from bad fibres. Thus, h1,1 = 1 + 2 = 3
since we have the generic fibre itself together with ρ = 2.
Now Υ = U ⊕ U ∼
= Γ2,2 and the moduli space of vector multiplets coming from the
quantum Picard lattice will be
O(Γ2,2 )\ O(2, 2)/(O(2) × O(2)).

(128)

This is exactly the moduli space for a string on T 2 . Thus if the type IIA string compactified
on X is dual to a heterotic string on K3 × T 2 then the T 2 part of the latter has none of the
gauge group from the ten-dimensional string wound around it. All must be wound around
the K3 factor.
The lattice Γ2,2 contains root diagrams for su(2) ⊕ su(2) and su(3) and so we should
be able to obtain these gauge symmetries for suitable choices of vector moduli. Clearly the
(−2)-curve in the generic K3 fibre may be shrunk down to a point to obtain SU(2). To
obtain more gauge symmetry one must shrink the K3 fibre itself down to a size of order (α′ )2
as discussed in section 4.3.
There is an important point we should note in general about enhanced gauge groups.
It is known that in N = 2 theories quantum effects may break the gauge group down to a
Cartan subgroup of the classical gauge group. Exactly how this happens depends on whether
any extra hypermultiplets are becoming massive when the point of classical enhanced gauge
symmetry occurs. We don’t want to discuss hypermultiplets yet but, at least in simple cases,
there are usually a small number, if any, of such massless particles and the theory will be
“asymptotically free”. In this case the gauge group will be broken.
Thus we only really expect the nonabelian gauge group to appear in the heterotic string
for the case that the coupling tends to zero. In the type IIA picture this corresponds to the
base P1 blowing up to infinite size. This means that we are “decompactifying” the type IIA
picture so that it is compactified, not on X, but on the generic fibre — a K3 surface. In this
respect we really are saying little more than we already said in section 4.3. We can obtain
enhanced gauge symmetries when we have a theory in six dimensions from a type IIA string
compactified on a certain K3 surface. This is approximately true in four dimensions so long
as the base P1 is very large.
For the heterotic string, the gauge group is broken in the quantum theory by Yang-Mills
instantons. For the type IIA string we note that world-sheet instantons wrapping around the
68

base P1 presumably play an analogous rôle. This is another example of one string’s target
space field theory being another string’s world-sheet field theory as we saw in section 5.1. It
would be interesting to see if these instantons can be explicitly mapped to each other.
To determine the gauge group we should say what happens when there is monodromy in
the Picard lattice of the generic K3 fibre as we move about W . There really is no difference
between this and the N = 4 analogue we discussed in section 5.2. The monodromy of the
Picard lattice should be translated into an action on the heterotic string on T 2 and divided
out. Thus we expect an asymmetric orbifold of T 2 for the heterotic dual. When finding
the enhanced gauge group we should take the monodromy-invariant subdiagram of the root
diagram. This may lead to non-simply-laced gauge groups again.
One should also worry about the global form of the gauge group. That is, one may have
the simply connected form of the group or one may have to mod out by part of the center,
e.g., the gauge group might be SU(2) or SO(3). All we have said above is only really enough
to determine the algebra of the gauge symmetry. We will evade this issue where possible
in these lectures by only specifying gauge algebras rather than gauge groups. There will be
times later on in these lectures when we have to confront this problem, however.
Let us mention here that compactifying the type IIB string, rather than the type IIA
string, on a K3 fibration, can lead to a very direct link between the geometry of the Calabi–
Yau threefold and Seiberg-Witten theory as explored in [128, 129]. Therefore an understanding of mirror symmetry within K3 fibrations may shed considerable light on some of
the details of string duality.
Finally let us note that further analysis may be done on the moduli space of vector multiplets to check that string duality is working as expected. We refer the reader to [130, 131]
for examples and especially to [132] where further direct links to geometry were established.

5.6

Heterotic-heterotic duality

We have seen how a type IIA string compactified on a Calabi–Yau space with a K3 fibration
may have as a dual partner a heterotic string compactified on K3 × T 2 . An obvious question
springs immediately to mind. What happens if X can admit more than one K3 fibration?
One might expect it may be dual to more than one heterotic string. This implies that we
can find pairs of heterotic strings that are dual to each other. We will follow this line of logic
to analyze a case introduced in [133]. This geometric approach was discussed originally in
[134, 135].
We are going to consider the example we introduced in the last section based on the
hypersurface in P4{12,8,2,1,1} given by (124). In the last section we projected onto the last 2
coordinates of the P4{12,8,2,1,1} to obtain a K3 fibration over P1 . Now let us project into the
last 3 coordinates. Our base space will now be P2{2,1,1} . The fibre will be an algebraic 2-torus,
that is, an elliptic curve. Thus X may be considered as an elliptic fibration as well as a K3
fibration.
69

C1
C0
f
Figure 8: The Hirzebruch surface Fn .
The space P2{2,1,1} is singular. Writing the homogeneous coordinates as [x0 , x1 , x2 ], there
is a Z2 quotient singularity at the point [1, 0, 0]. This may be blown up, introducing a (−2)curve. This exceptional curve provided the base of the K3 fibration in the last section. We
may also use it to write the blow-up of P2{2,1,1} as a fibration. From the same argument as
we used in the last section, it is straight forward to see that the fibre will be P1 . Thus our
blown-up P2{2,1,1} is a fibration with base space given by P1 and with fibre given by P1 . Note
that the fibre never degenerates. Such complex surfaces are called “Hirzebruch surfaces”.
These objects will turn out to be important for the analysis of the heterotic string on a K3
surface so we discuss the geometry here in some detail.
A P1 bundle over P1 may be regarded as the compactification of a complex line bundle
over P1 by adding a point to each fibre “at infinity”. Such line bundles are classified by an
integer — the first Chern class of the bundle integrated over the base P1 . We use the notation
Fn , to denote the Hirzebruch surface built from the line bundle with c1 = −n. Assume first
that n ≥ 0. Denote the base rational curve by C0 . The line bundle with c1 = −n represents
the normal bundle to C0 and so the self-intersection of C0 equals −n. Thus C0 is isolated
(assuming n > 0). Denote the fibre by f . Clearly #(f ∩ f ) = 0 and #(f ∩ C0 ) = 1. We
may introduce a class C1 = C0 + nf . This intersects f once and C0 not at all. C1 is a
section of the bundle, and hence a rational curve, away from the isolated section C0 . The
self intersection of C1 is +n. Note that C1 can be deformed. Thus we view Fn as a P1 bundle
over P1 with one isolated section, of self-intersection −n, and a family of sections, disjoint
from the isolated section of self-intersection +n. This picture of a Hirzebruch surface, with
two sections in the class C1 shown, is drawn in figure 8. If n = 0 this picture degenerates
and we simply have F0 ∼
= P1 × P1 .
Note that if n < 0 we may exchange the rôles of C0 and C1 and recover the surface F−n .
Thus we may assume n ≥ 0.
For the case we are concerned with in this section C0 is the exceptional divisor with
self-intersection −2 and so we have F2 as the base of X as an elliptic fibration. It turns out
however that F2 is somewhat “unstable” in this context. Note that one may embed P2{2,1,1}
into P3 as follows. Denote the homogeneous coordinates by [x0 , x1 , x2 ] and [y0 , y1 , y2 , y3 ]
70

respectively. By putting
y0 = x0
y1 = x21
y2 = x22

(129)

y3 = x1 x2 ,
we embed P2{2,1,1} as the hypersurface
y1 y2 − y32 = 0.

(130)

This is singular, as expected, but we may deform this hypersurface to a generic quadric. It
is well-known that a generic quadric in P3 is isomorphic to P1 × P1 ∼
= F0 (see, for example,
2
[8]). Thus P{2,1,1} may be blown-up to give F2 but deformed to give F0 . A generic point in
the moduli space of X is actually an elliptic fibration over F0 rather than F2 .25
We have arrived at the result that X is an elliptic fibration over F0 . This may be viewed
as a two-stage fibration. X may be projected onto a P1 to produce a K3 fibration. The fibre
of this map may be projected onto the other P1 to write the K3 as an elliptic fibration.
Since the base space of the elliptic fibration is P1 × P1 , if one of the P1 ’s in the base
may be viewed as the base for X as a K3 fibration, then so may the other P1 . Thus X can
be written as a K3 fibration in two different ways. This suggests that there should be two
heterotic strings dual to the type IIA theory on X and hence dual to each other. What is
the relationship between these two heterotic strings?
One of the heterotic strings will be compactified on S1 × T12 and the other on S2 × T22 ,
where S1 and S2 are K3 surfaces. We examined the moduli space coming from the vector
multiplets in section 5.5 and saw that the 3 moduli described the dilaton-axion and the
Narain moduli of the T 2 (without any Wilson lines switched on). The dilaton is given by
the area of the base P1 in X. Let us determine the area of the heterotic T 2 in terms of the
moduli of the K3 fibre within X.
The generic K3 fibre within X has Picard number 2 and has a moduli space of Kähler
form and B-field given by (128). Let Γ2,2 be generated by the null vectors w and v together
with their duals w ∗ and v ∗ . For simplicity we will avoid switching on any B-fields. Thus we
consider a point in the moduli space (128) to be given by a space-like 2-plane, ✵, spanned
by w ∗ + αw and v ∗ + βv, for α, β > 0. Following our construction to determine the Kähler
form, we have that ✵ ∩ w ⊥ is spanned by v ∗ + βv which is contained in w ⊥ /w. Thus, as
promised, B is zero. From our analysis in section 3.3 we see that the Kähler form determines
the volume to be
J.J = 2α + B 2 = 2α.
(131)
To see this note that when we blow-up the fibration of X over P2{2,1,1} to a fibration over F2 we introduce
an elliptic scroll just as in section 5.4. The results of [119] tell us that the (−2)-curve will therefore vanish
for a generic complex structure.
25

71

We also have that the direction of J is given by v ∗ + βv. Thus the Kähler form is
J=

s

α ∗ q
v + αβv.
β

(132)

We have seen that the generic K3 fibre is itself an elliptic fibration over P1 . Knowing the
intersection numbers of the curves within this fibration together with the positivity of the
Kähler class determines the class of the base P1 to be v ∗ − v and that of the elliptic fibre to
be v. Thus, the area of the P1 within the K3 is given by
J.C =

q

αβ −

s

α
.
β

(133)

Now let us reinterpret ✵ in terms of the moduli of the T 2 . From section 3.5 we obtain a
map from W into W ∗ given by26
!
α 0
ψ=
.
(134)
0 β
This is symmetric and thus gives the metric.
q
√

Therefore, the area of the T 2 is given by

det(ψ) = αβ.
We may now obtain an interesting result confirming the analysis of [133] by going to
the limit where α and β are taken to be very large. In this case, our heterotic string is
compactified on K3 × T 2 where the 2-torus is very large. In the type IIA string, the generic
K3 fibre contains a rational curve which becomes very large. From the equation (133), the
area of this rational curve is proportional to the heterotic string’s 2-torus in this limit.
This limit as α, β → ∞ may be viewed as a decompactification of the model to a sixdimensional theory given by the heterotic string compactified on a K3 surface. Let us consider
the coupling of this six-dimensional theory, λ6 . This is given by the four-dimensional coupling
prior to decompactification and the area of the T 2 . The former is given by the size of the
base P1 of the K3 fibration, which we refer to as P11 . The latter is given by the area of the
base of the K3 fibre itself written as an elliptic fibration, which we will refer to as P12 . We
have that
Area(P12 )
λ26 = λ24 . Area(T 2 ) ∼
.
(135)
Area(P11 )
The other heterotic string is obtained by exchanging the rôles of P11 and P12 . Thus we
have
Proposition 7 Let X be the Calabi–Yau manifold given by a resolution of the degree 24
hypersurface in P4{12,8,2,1,1} . The two heterotic string theories dual to the type IIA string
Note that W is spanned by w∗ and v ∗ ; and W ∗ is spanned by w and v. There is no simple choice of
conventions which would have circumvented this notational irritation!
26

72

theory on X decompactify to two heterotic string theories compactified on K3 surfaces. From
(135) these two six-dimensional theories are S-dual in the sense that the coupling of one
theory is inversely proportional to the coupling of the other theory.
The main assumption underlying this proposal is that these heterotic string theories actually
exist. We will get closer to identifying these theories in section 6.3.
We may vary the complex structure of X and this should correspond to deformations of
the K3 together with its vector bundle on the heterotic side. Note that the K3 of one of
the heterotic strings will, in general, have quite different moduli than the K3 of the other
heterotic string since exchanging the rôles of P11 and P12 need not be a geometrical symmetry
of X — only a topological symmetry. Before we can explicitly give the map between these
K3 surfaces and their vector bundles we need to map out the moduli space of the moduli
from the hypermultiplets. This remains to be done.
There are many examples of Calabi–Yau manifolds which admit more than one K3 fibration. This will lead to many examples of heterotic-heterotic duality. In most cases however
the result will be a rather tortuous mapping between four-dimensional theories and will not
be as simple as the above example.

5.7

Extremal transitions and phase transitions

We will take our first tentative steps into the moduli space of hypermultiplets in this section.
This will deal with the simplest aspects of the bundle over K3 — namely when this bundle,
or part of this bundle, becomes trivial.
Our heterotic string theory is compactified on a bundle over K3 × T 2 which we view
as the product of a bundle over K3 and a bundle over T 2 . Generically one would expect
the deformation space of this bundle structure to be smooth. Where this can break down
however is when part of the bundle becomes trivial. To deform away from such a bundle we
may wrap the trivial part around either the K3 surface or the T 2 . Thus we obtain branches
in the moduli space. A deformation in the K3 part will be a hypermultiplet modulus while a
deformation in the T 2 part will be a vector modulus. Our picture therefore for a transition
across this branch will consist of moving in the moduli space of hypermultiplets until suddenly
a vector scalar becomes massless and can be used as a marginal operator to move off into a
new branch of the moduli space, at which point some of the moduli in the hypermultiplets
in the original theory may acquire mass.
When we compactify the E8 × E8 or Spin(32)/Z2 heterotic string on a vector bundle,
the original gauge group is broken by the holonomy of the bundle. Thus, when we move
to a transition point where part of the vector bundle becomes trivial we may well expect
the holonomy group to shrink and thus the observed gauge group is enhanced. Since we
have only N = 2 supersymmetry this observed gauge group enhancement may get killed by
quantum effects but should be present in the zero-coupling limit.
73

The picture is the geometric version of the “Higgs” transitions explored in, for example,
[102]. We wish to see how this transition appears from the type IIA picture.
We have already seen what the type IIA picture is for moving within the moduli space
of vector scalars to a point at which an enhanced gauge symmetry appears. This is where
we vary the Kähler form on the generic K3 fibre to shrink down some rational curves (or go
to Planck scale effects). Thus, every K3 fibre becomes singular. That is, we have a curve of
singularities in X. Now given such a singular Calabi–Yau manifold, it may be possible to
deform this space by a deformation of complex structure to obtain a new smooth Calabi–
Yau manifold. This would correspond to a deformation of each singular K3 fibre to obtain
a smooth K3 fibre. This process will decrease the Picard number of the generic fibre (as we
have lost the class of rational curves we shrank down) and will change the topology of the
underlying Calabi–Yau threefold.
In the type IIA language then, this Higgs transition consists of deforming the Kähler form
on X to obtain a singular space and then smoothing by a deformation to another smooth
manifold. Such a topology-changing process is called an “extremal transition”.
One example of an extremal transition is the “conifold” transition of [136]. A conifold
transition consists of shrinking down isolated rational curves and then deforming away the
singularities. These were explored in the context of full string theory in [75, 137] (see also
B. Greene’s lectures). In our case however we are not shrinking down isolated curves but
whole curves of curves and so we are not discussing a conifold transition.
There has been speculation [138, 137] that the moduli space of all Calabi–Yau threefolds
is connected because of extremal transitions (based on an older, much weaker, statement by
Reid [139]). See [140, 141] for recent results in this direction. Certainly no counter example
is yet known to this hypothesis. The heterotic picture of these extremal transitions is simple
to understand in the case of singularities developing within the generic fibre. Such specific
extremal transitions are certainly not sufficient to connect the moduli space and we will
require an understanding of nonperturbative heterotic string theory to complete the picture.
One obvious example to worry about is when the Calabi–Yau threefold on the type IIA side
goes through an extremal transition from something that is a K3 fibration to something that
is not. It is not difficult to see that such a transition must involve shrinking down the base,
W , of the fibration and thus going to a strongly-coupled heterotic string. It is not surprising
therefore that we cannot understand such a transition perturbatively in the heterotic picture.
Given a dual pair of a type IIA string compactified on a Calabi–Yau manifold and a
heterotic string compactified on K3 × T 2 we may generate more dual pairs by following each
through these phase transitions we do understand perturbatively. Such “chains” of dual
pairs were first identified in [142] and many examples have been given in [143]. In order to
understand where these chains come from, and indeed the original Kachru–Vafa examples
of dual pairs in [103], we need to confront the issue of compactifying the heterotic string on
a K3 surface, a subject we have done our best to avoid up to this point!

74

6

The Heterotic String

This section will be concerned with the heterotic string compactified on a K3 surface. In
particular we would like to find a string theory dual to this. An obvious answer is another
heterotic string compactified on another K3 surface, as we saw in section 5.6. We will
endeavor to find a type II dual. It turns out the we will not be able to find a type II dual
directly but will have to go via the construction of section 5. This process (in its various
manifestations) is often called “F-theory”. A great deal of the following analysis is based on
work by Morrison and Vafa [144, 135, 145].

6.1

N = 1 theories

The heterotic string compactified on a K3 surface gives a theory of N = 1 supergravity in
six dimensions. From section 4.1 the holonomy algebra of the moduli space coming from
supersymmetry will be sp(1). There are two types of supermultiplet in six dimensions which
contain moduli fields:
1. The hypermultiplets each contain 4 real massless scalars which transform as quaternionic objects under the sp(1) holonomy.
2. The “tensor multiplets” each contain one real massless scalar.
Thus, at least away from points where the manifold structure may break down, we expect
the moduli space to be in the form of a product
MN =1 = MT × MH ,

(136)

(possibly divided by a discrete group) where MT is a generic Riemannian manifold spanned
by moduli in tensor supermultiplets and MH is a quaternionic Kähler manifold spanned by
moduli in hypermultiplets.
For a review of some of the aspects of these theories we refer to [146]. The six-dimensional
dilaton lives in a tensor multiplet. An interesting feature of these theories is that it appears
to be impossible to write down an action for these theories unless there is exactly one tensor
multiplet.27 Thus moduli in tensor multiplets other than the dilaton should be regarded as
fairly peculiar objects.
It is useful to compare N = 1 theories in six dimensions with the resulting N = 2
theory in four dimensions obtained by compactifying the six-dimensional theory on a 2torus. To explain the moduli which appear in four dimensions we need to consider another
supermultiplet of the N = 1 theory in six dimensions. This is the vector multiplet which
27

This is because the gravity supermultiplet (of which there is always exactly one) contains a self-dual
two-form and the tensor multiplets contain anti-self-dual two-forms. It is problematic to write down Lorentzinvariant actions for theories with net (anti-)self-dual degrees of freedom [147].

75

contains a real vector degree of freedom but no scalars. Each supermultiplet in six dimensions
produces moduli in four dimensions as follows:
1. The 4 real scalars of a hypermultiplet in six dimensions simply produce the 4 real
scalars of a hypermultiplet in four dimensions.
2. The 1 real scalar of a tensor multiplet together with the anti-self-dual two-form compactified on T 2 produce the two real scalars of a vector multiplet in four dimensions.
3. The vector field of a vector multiplet compactified on the two 1-cycles of T 2 of produces
the two real scalars of a vector multiplet in four dimensions.
That is, hypermultiplets in six dimensions map to hypermultiplets in four dimension but
both tensor multiplets and vector multiplets in six dimensions map to vector multiplets in
four dimensions.
We should emphasize that quantum field theories in four and six dimensions are quite
different. In particular, conventional arguments imply that six-dimensional quantum field
theories should always be infra-red free and therefore rather boring. This notion has been
revised recently in light of many of the results coming from string duality [146, 148] where it is
now believed that nontrivial theories can occur in six dimensions as a result of “tensionless
string-like solitons” appearing. Such theories potentially appear when one goes through
extremal transitions between tensor multiplet moduli and hypermultiplet moduli.
Despite the strange properties of these exotic six-dimensional field theories we will be
able to avoid having to explain them here. This is because all of our discussion will really
happen in four dimensions — the six-dimensional picture is only considered as a large T 2
limit. It is important to realize however that some of the things we will say, based on fourdimensional physics, may well be rather subtle in six dimensions. An example of this will
be when certain enhanced gauge symmetries are said to appear when the hypermultiplet
moduli are tuned to a certain value. If massless tensor moduli also happen to appear at
the same time (which will happen for E8 as we shall see) then any conventional description
of the resulting six-dimensional field theory is troublesome. Declaring what the massless
spectrum of such a theory is not an entirely well-defined question and one should move the
theory slightly by perturbing either a massless hypermultiplet modulus or a tensor modulus
before asking such a question.

6.2

Elliptic fibrations

Our method of approach will be to consider a type IIA string compactified on a Calabi–
Yau threefold, X, dual to a heterotic string compactified on K3 × T 2 and then take the
volume of the 2-torus to infinity thus decompactifying our theory to a heterotic string on a
K3 surface. Actually, decompactification is a rather delicate process and perhaps we should
be more pragmatic and say that we will consider a heterotic string on K3 × T 2 and try to
76

systematically ignore all aspects of the type IIA string on X coming from the T 2 part of the
heterotic string.
Much of the analysis we require we have already covered in section 5.6. There, for a
specific example, we did precisely the decompactification we require. We need to consider
how general we can make this process. Clearly we should insist that our moduli space of
vector multiplets in the four-dimensional theory corresponding to the heterotic string on
K3 × T 2 contain the space
O(Γ2,2 )\ O(2, 2)/(O(2) × O(2)).

(137)

That is, we have the moduli space of the string on T 2 . If this were not the case, we could
not claim that we had really compactified on a true product of K3 × T 2 . From the analysis
of section 5.4 we expect X to be a K3 fibration. Given the appearance of Γ2,2 in (137) we
expect from section 5.5 that the Picard lattice of the generic fibre of X must contain the
lattice Γ1,1 .
A K3 surface with a Picard lattice containing Γ1,1 is an elliptic fibration. To see this,
let v and v ∗ be a basis for Γ1,1 . The class v − v ∗ is a primitive element of self-intersection
−2 and thus (see, for example, [16]) either this class, or minus this class, corresponds to a
rational curve within the K3. Now either v or v ∗ is a nef curve of zero self-intersection. This
will be the class of the elliptic fibre. Note that we have a rational curve in the K3 surface
intersecting each fibre once — our elliptic fibration has a global section. What’s more, it is
easy to see that this section is unique as there is no other (−2)-curve.28
We thus claim that X is a K3 fibration and that each K3 fibre can be written as an
elliptic fibration with a unique section. Together these give [149]
Proposition 8 If a heterotic string compactified on K3 × T 2 is dual to a type IIA string on
X and there are no obstructions in the moduli space to taking the size of T 2 to infinity and
thereby ignoring the effects associated to it, then X is an elliptic fibration over a complex
surface with a section.
This proposition is subject to the same conditions as proposition 6 and to the caveat in the
footnote above.
Let us denote this elliptic fibration as p : X → Θ. Θ itself is a P1 fibration over P1 ,
Θ → W . The simplest possibility is that Θ is the Hirzebruch surface Fn . This need not be
the case however — there may be some bad fibres over some points in W .
28

Actually we have cheated here. We have assumed that the bundle over K3 may be chosen so that it
breaks the E8 × E8 or Spin(32)/Z2 gauge group. Then the Narain moduli space for the T 2 really is given
by (137). There can be times however, as we shall see soon, when this is not possible and then the Narain
moduli space for the 2-torus becomes larger. This allows for more than one section of the elliptic fibration.
We claim this is not important for the examples we discuss in these lectures, however, as we may begin in
a case where the gauge group is broken by the K3 bundle and then proceed via extremal transitions to the
case we desire, preserving the section of the elliptic fibration if X.

77

The subject of elliptic fibrations has been studied intensively by algebraic geometers,
thanks largely to Kodaira [150]. This can be contrasted to the subject of K3 fibrations,
about which relatively little is known.
Let us fix our notation. Let W , the base of X as a K3 fibration, be P1 with homogeneous
coordinates [t0 , t1 ]. We will also use the affine coordinate t = t1 /t0 . Θ is a P1 fibration
over W . Over a generic point in W , the P1 fibre will have homogeneous coordinates [s0 , s1 ]
and affine coordinate s = s1 /s0 . Now we want to write down the fibre of X as an elliptic
fibration over Θ. Any elliptic curve may be written as a cubic hypersurface in P2 . Writing
this in affine coordinates we may put the fibration in “Weierstrass form” for a generic point
(s, t) ∈ Θ:
y 2 = x3 + a(s, t)x + b(s, t),
(138)
where x and y are affine coordinates in a patch of P2 and a and b are arbitrary polynomials.
If Θ itself has bad fibres — that is, it is not Fn — then more coordinate patches need to be
introduced to give a global description of the elliptic fibration.
Note that not any elliptic fibration can be written in Weierstrass form. Homogenizing
the coordinates of P2 putting x = x1 /x0 and y = x2 /x0 , we see that [0, 0, 1] always lies in
(138), which gives the fibration a global section. Thus only elliptic fibrations with a section
can be written in this form. Luckily this is the case we are interested in.
The j-invariant of the elliptic fibre (138) is 4a3 /δ, where δ is the discriminant of (138)
given by
δ = 4a3 + 27b2 .
(139)
If δ = 0 then the elliptic fibre is singular. The hypersurface, or divisor, δ(w, z) = 0 in Θ
thus gives the locus of bad fibres. It is commonly called the discriminant locus.
There are only so many things that can happen at a generic bad fibre of an elliptic K3
surface and these have been classified (see, for example, [16]). Let us take a small disc
D ⊂ C, embedded in Θ, with coordinate z which cuts a generic point on the discriminant
locus transversely. Let z = 0 be the location of the discriminant locus. Let us analyze the
restriction of the fibration of X to the part which is fibred over D, We are thus considering
an open set of a fibration of a complex surface. Assuming that the total space of the fibration
is smooth and there are no (−1)-curves, which will certainly be true if we are talking about
a Calabi–Yau manifold, the possibilities for what happens to the fibre when z = 0 is shown
in figure 9. The case I0 is when there is no zero of δ and the elliptic fibre is smooth. In all
other cases the lines and curves in figure 9 represent rational curves. Case I1 is a rational
curve with a “double point”, i.e., it looks locally like y 2 = x2 at one point and case II is a
rational curve with a “cusp”, i.e., it looks locally like y 2 = x3 at one point. All the other
cases consist of multiple rational curves. All of the singular fibres should be homologous
to the smooth fibre. To achieve this, some of the rational curves in the bad fibre must be
counted more than once to obtain the correct homology. The multiplicity of the curves are

78

2

I0*

I0
I1

2

I*n
In

II*

3

2

5

4

4

6

3

2

3

3

2

III*
2
1

IV

2 2

( n lines)

1

III

2 2

( n + 5 lines)

1

II

2

IV *

4

2

3

1

2

2

1
2
1

Figure 9: Classification of elliptic fibres.
shown as the small numbers in figure 9. If omitted, multiplicity one is assumed.29
The possibilities listed in figure 9 can also be classified according to the Weierstrass form.
On our disc, D, the polynomials, a and b, in (138) will be polynomials in z. Let us define
the non-negative integers (L, K, N) by
a(z) = z L a0 (z)
b(z) = z K b0 (z)

(140)

δ(z) = z N δ0 (z),
where a0 (z), b0 (z), and δ0 (z) are all nonzero at z = 0. The triple (L, K, N) then determines
which fibre we have according to table 4. See [32] for an explanation of this. To be precise,
the Weierstrass form of the fibration in x, y and z will produce a surface singularity which,
when blown-up, will have the fibres in figure 9. This is closely linked to the results in table
1.
It is important to note that this classification procedure only applies to a smooth point
on the discriminant locus. Only in this case can we characterize the bad fibre in terms of the
29

There is also a possibility that In fibres can appear with multiplicity greater than one. We ignore this
as the canonical class of such a fibration cannot be trivial.

79

L
≥0
0
≥1
1
≥2
≥2
2
≥3
3
≥4

K
N Fibre
Υ′
≥0 0
I0
0 > 0 IN
AN −1
1
2
II
≥2 3
III
A1
2
4
IV
A2
≥3 6
I∗0
D4
3 ≥ 7 I∗N −6 DN −2
4
8
IV∗
E6
≥5 9
III∗
E7
∗
5
10
II
E8

Table 4: Weierstrass classification of fibres.
family of elliptic curves over our small disc, D. When the discriminant is singular the nature
of the bad fibre need not be expressible in terms of the geometry of a complex surface —
it will be higher-dimensional in character. In general, for Calabi–Yau threefolds, we should
expect to encounter some singular fibres not listed above. Such exotic fibres are important in
string theory but we will try to avoid such examples here as it makes the analysis somewhat
harder.
For our elliptic fibration, p : X → Θ, a knowledge of the explicit Weierstrass form is
enough to calculate the canonical class, KX . This may be done as follows. In homogeneous
coordinates, the Weierstrass form is
x0 x22 = x31 + ax20 x1 + bx30 ,

(141)

giving a cubic curve in P2 . Now since the elliptic fibration is not trivial, this P2 will vary
nontrivially as we move over Θ. We may describe such a P2 as the projectivization of a
sum of three line bundles over Θ. We are free to declare that x0 is a section of a trivial line
bundle. We may then find a line bundle, L, such that x1 is a section of L 2 and x2 is a
section of L 3 in order to be compatible with (141). It also follows that a is a section of L 4
and b is a section of L 6 .
Now let us consider the normal bundle of the section, σ, given by [x0 , x1 , x2 ] = [0, 0, 1],
embedded in X. We may use affine coordinates ξ1 = x1 /x2 and ξ2 = x0 /x2 whose origin
gives the section σ. Note that ξ1 is a section of L −1 and ξ2 is a section of L −3 . Near σ,
(141) becomes
ξ2 = ξ13 .
(142)
Thus, ξ1 is a good coordinate to describe the fibre of the normal bundle of σ in X. This
implies that this normal bundle is given by L −1 .

80

We may now use the adjunction formula for σ ⊂ X to give
K X | σ = Kσ + L .

(143)

Actually, this is the only contribution towards the canonical class of X. That is,
KX = p∗ (KΘ + L ).

(144)

For the case we will be interested in, we want KX = 0 and so L = −KΘ . We will give
examples of such constructions later.
Note that if there is a divisor within Θ over which a vanishes to order ≥ 4 and b vanishes
to order ≥ 6, we may redefine L to “absorb” this divisor and lower the degrees of a and
b accordingly. This is why no such fibres appear in table 4. As this will change KX , such
occurrences cannot happen in a Calabi–Yau variety.
Let us consider a K3 surface written as an elliptic fibration with a section. The Picard
number of the K3 is at least two — we have the section and a generic fibre as algebraic
curves. If we have any of the fibres In , for n > 2, or I∗n , III, IV, II∗ , III∗ , or IV∗ we will also
have a contribution to the Picard group from reducible fibres. Each of these fibres contains
rational curves in the form of a root lattice of a simply-laced group. Let us denote this
lattice Υ′ . The possibilities are listed in table 4. Thus, shrinking down these rational curves
will induce the corresponding gauge group for a type IIA string.
We know that for a Calabi–Yau manifold compactified on a K3 fibration, the moduli
coming from varying the Kähler form on the K3 fibre map to the T 2 part of the heterotic
string compactified on K3×T 2 . In particular, the act of blowing-up rational curves in the K3
to resolve singularities, and hence break potential gauge groups, is identified with switching
on Wilson lines on T 2 . Thus, to ignore Wilson lines, these rational curves must all be blown
down and held at zero area. That is, any of the fibres In , for n > 2, or I∗n , III, IV, II∗ , III∗ ,
or IV∗ appearing in the elliptic fibration will produce an enhanced gauge symmetry in the
theory.
From section 5.6 and, inqparticular (132), the size of an elliptic fibre within this K3 will
be fixed to some constant α/β as α, β → ∞ to make the T 2 infinite area. Thus this size
is “frozen out” as a degree of freedom. To ignore the 2-torus degrees of freedom for the
type IIA string compactified on X we should take the K3 fibre within X, consider it as an
elliptic fibration with an elliptic fibre of frozen area and blow down any rational curves which
may take the Picard number of the K3 fibre beyond 2. In summary, any degrees of freedom
coming from sizes within the elliptic fibre structure are ignored.
Consider the base, Θ, as a P1 bundle over W . Suppose we have bad fibres in this case.
These must correspond to reducible fibres. Now, when we build X as a K3 fibration over W ,
these reducible fibres in Θ will build reducible fibres in X. This is exactly case 3 listed at
the beginning of section 5.5. That is, varying the size of irreducible parts of these reducible
fibres will give moduli in vector supermultiplets which cannot be understood perturbatively
81

on the heterotic side. The important point to note here is that these degrees of freedom will
not go away when we unwind any Wilson lines around T 2 and take its area to infinity. Thus,
these degrees of freedom must be associated to the six-dimensional theory of the heterotic
string compactified on a K3. From section 6.1 these moduli must therefore come from tensor
multiplets in the six-dimensional theory. It is the peculiar nature of tensor moduli which
prevented us from having a perturbative understanding of these moduli in section 5.5.
We saw in section 5.6 how the size of W and the size of the fibre of Θ were used to
produce the area of the heterotic string’s T 2 and the size of its dilaton. The area of the T 2
is lost as a degree of freedom in our six-dimensional theory. We see then that the number of
tensor multiplets in our theory will be the Picard number of Θ minus one. In the case that
Θ is Fn , that is, there are no bad fibres, the number of tensor multiplets will be one and
this single multiplet contains the heterotic dilaton as a modulus.
Questions concerning hypermultiplets between the four-dimensional theory and the sixdimensional theory are unchanged. In particular, we retain the relationship from section 5.3
that the number of hypermultiplets is given by h2,1 (X) + 1.
Now we have counted massless tensor multiplets and hypermultiplets, let us count massless vector multiplets. We know that any vector multiplet in the four-dimensional theory
must have its origin in either a vector multiplet or a tensor multiplet in six dimensions.
Thus we can count the number of six-dimensional vectors by subtracting h1,1 (Θ) − 1 from
the number of four-dimensional vectors.
 Many of these vectors can be seen directly in terms of the enhanced nonabelian gauge symmetry but
there is an additional contribution. In section 5.5 we saw how H 2 (X), where X is a K3 fibration,
could be built from elements from the base, from the generic fibre and from the bad fibres in a fairly
obvious way. Now we want to consider if the same thing is true for an elliptic fibration. Analyzing
the spectral sequence one can see that H 2 (Θ, Z) contributes, for the base, to give the tensor multiplets
and H 0 (Θ, R2 p∗ Z) contributes for the fibres. This latter piece accounts for the enhanced nonabelian
symmetry discussed above. The object of interest will be the term H 1 (Θ, R1 p∗ Z). In the case of K3
fibrations, this is trivial since H 1 (K3) = 0. This ceases to be true for an elliptic fibration however. This
contribution may be associated to the group of sections of the bundle as seen in [151]. Later on, in
section 6.5, we will consider a case where this is a finite group, but here we note that if this group is
infinite, then its rank will contribute to the dimension of H 2 (X).
We see then that if the elliptic fibration has an infinite number of sections, there will be massless vector
fields beyond those accounted for from the nonabelian gauge symmetry from bad fibres. These may
contribute extra u(1) terms to the gauge symmetry [145] and, conceivably, more nonabelian parts. As
this part of the gauge group is rather difficult to analyze we will restrict ourselves to examples in these
lectures where there is no such contribution.

6.3

Small instantons

Our goal in this section will be to find the map from at least part of the moduli space
of hypermultiplets for a type IIA string on a Calabi–Yau manifold to the moduli space of
hypermultiplets of the heterotic string compactified on a K3×T 2 . As we have seen, the T 2
82

factor is irrelevant for the hypermultiplet moduli space and we are free to consider the latter
as a heterotic string on a K3 surface so long as the Calabi–Yau is an elliptic fibration with
a section. We will be able to go some way to determining “which” heterotic string a given
elliptic threefold is dual to.
The best policy when finding a map between two moduli spaces is to start with a particularly special point in the moduli space of one theory with hopefully unique properties
which allow it to be identified with a correspondingly special point in the other theory’s
moduli space. This special point will usually be very symmetric in some sense. The trick,
invented in [135] and inspired by the work of [152], is to look for very large gauge symmetries
resulting from collapsed instantons in the heterotic string.
Recall that the K3 surface, S, on which the heterotic string is compactified comes
equipped with a bundle, E → S, with c2 (E) = 24. Fixing S, the bundle E will have
moduli. A useful trick when visualizing the moduli space of bundles is to try to flatten out
as much of the connection on the bundle as possible. Of course, the fact that c2 (E) = 24
makes it impossible to completely flatten out E but we can concentrate the parts of the
bundle with significant curvature into small regions isolated from each other. In this picture,
an approximate point of view of at least part of the moduli space of the bundle can be viewed
as 24 “instantons” localized in small regions over S each of which contributes one to c2 (E).
As well as its position, each instanton will have a degree of freedom associated to its
size — that is, the characteristic length away from the centre of the instanton where the
curvature becomes small. At least from a classical point of view, there is nothing to stop
one shrinking this length scale down to zero.30 Such a process naturally takes one to the
boundary of the moduli space of instantons.
Let us consider the E8 × E8 heterotic string. The observed gauge group of a heterotic
string theory compactified on S will be the part of the original E8 × E8 which is not killed by
the holonomy of E. It is the “centralizer” of the embedding of the holonomy in E8 × E8 —
i.e., all the elements of E8 × E8 which commute with the holonomy. What is the holonomy
around a collapsed instanton? In general the global holonomy is generated by contractable
loops due to the curvature of the bundle, and from non-contractable loops in the base. The
curvature is zero everywhere when the instanton has become a point. Also, if S is smooth
we may look at a 3-sphere surrounding the instanton to look for holonomy effects. Since
π1 (S 3 ) = 0 we cannot generate non-contractable loops. Thus, the holonomy of a point-like
instanton is trivial.31
One possibility is to shrink all 24 instantons down to zero size. When we do this, E
will have no holonomy whatsoever and the resulting heterotic string theory will retain its
30

Although there is no reason to suppose that one may do this independently for all 24 instantons.
Note that this need not be the case if S has an orbifold singularity and the instanton sits at this point.
Then we can only surround the instanton by a lens space which is not simply connected. One should note
that we have conveniently ignored those loops which happen to go through the point where the point-like
instanton sits.
31

83

full E8 × E8 gauge symmetry. As this is such a big gauge group it is a good place to start
analyzing our duality map.
We thus want to find a Calabi–Yau space on which we may compactify the type IIA
string to give an E8 × E8 gauge symmetry. That is, we want an elliptic fibration over Fn
such that when viewed as a K3 fibration, the generic K3 fibre has two E8 singularities. Let
us discuss what this implies about the discriminant locus within Θ ∼
= Fn .
First, let us be a little sloppy with notation and not distinguish between curves and their
divisor class (roughly speaking, homology class) in Θ. Thus we use C0 to denote the class of
base, i.e., the (−n)-curve within Θ, and f to denote the class of the generic P1 fibre. Let us
determine KΘ in terms of these classes. Consider the adjunction formula for a curve C ∈ Θ.
Integrating this over C we obtain its Euler characteristic
χ(C) = −C.(C + KΘ ).

(145)

Knowing that C0 and f are spheres is enough to determine
KFn = −2C0 − (2 + n)f.

(146)

Let us use the letters A, B, and ∆ to denote the divisors associated to the equations a = 0,
b = 0, and δ = 0 respectively. From (144), the classes of these divisors will be
A = 8C0 + (8 + 4n)f
B = 12C0 + (12 + 6n)f

(147)

∆ = 24C0 + (24 + 12n)f,
in order that X be Calabi–Yau.
The locus of E8 singularities in X will map to curves in Θ. As these E8 ’s are independent,
we want to make these curves disjoint sections of Θ, that is, one curve will be in the class C0
(the isolated zero section of the Hirzebruch surface as a P1 bundle over P1 ) and the other in
the class C∞ = C0 + nf (a section in the non-isolated class which we view as a section “at
infinity” of the Hirzebruch surface). From table 4 we see that we want II∗ fibres over these
curves.
These two curves of II∗ fibres will account for a large portion of the A, B, and ∆ divisors.
Let us write A′ , B ′ , and ∆′ for the remaining parts of the divisors not contained in the curves
C0 and C∞ . From table 4 we have
A′ = A − 4(C0 ) − 4(C0 + nf ) = 8f

B ′ = B − 5(C0 ) − 5(C0 + nf ) = 2C0 + (12 + n)f

∆′ = ∆ − 10(C0 ) − 10(C0 + nf ) = 4C0 + (24 + 2n)f.
84

(148)

12 + n
C∞

II*

s0 = 0

∆′
C0

s1 = 0

II*

12 − n
12 + n
C∞

II*

C0

s0 = 0

s1 = 0

II*

12 − n

Figure 10: 24 small instantons in the E8 × E8 string.
This means that what is left of the discriminant, ∆′ , will collide with the curve C0 a
total number of C0 .∆′ = 2(12 − n) times and with the curve C∞ a total number of 2(12 + n)
times. These 48 points of intersection are not independent. The reason that ∆′ collides with
the curves of II∗ fibres is precisely because B ′ also collides with these curves. Each time B ′
hits these curves, the degree of the discriminant will rise by 2 and hence ∆′ hits them twice
in the same place. To see exactly what shape this intersection is one may explicitly write
out the equations. The result is that ∆′ crosses itself transversely at these points as well as
hitting C0 or C∞ . We see then that, generically, ∆′ collides with C0 at 12 − n points and
with C∞ at 12 + n points. Within ∆′ , away from these collisions, we expect the discriminant
to behave reasonably nicely.32 The result is shown in the upper part of figure 10.
We know how to deal with all of the points on the discriminant from Kodaira’s list in
figure 9 except for the 24 points of collision of ∆′ with the two lines of II∗ fibres. Here we
have to work harder to obtain a smooth model for X.
Let us focus on one of these points where either C0 or C∞ hits ∆′ twice within Θ. Blow
e → Θ. This will introduce a new rational curve, E, in the
up this point of intersection, π : Θ
32

Although it will have cusps.

85

e such that K = π ∗ K + E. Pulling back L onto Θ
e will show that a now
blown-up surface Θ
Θ
e
Θ
vanishes to degree 4 on E and b vanishes to degree 6 on E. Introduce L ′ = π ∗ L − E and
write a and b in terms of L ′ instead of L. Now a and b will not vanish at all on a generic
point on E. Note that the effect on KX of blowing up the base, Θ, and then subtracting E
from L nicely cancels out and so X is still Calabi–Yau.
Thus, to obtain a smooth X we need to blow up all 24 points of collision. This process is
shown in the lower part of figure 10. The dotted lines represent the 24 new P1 ’s introduced
into the base. Note that they are not part of the discriminant.
From our interpretation of moduli in section 6.2 we see that in terms of the underlying
six-dimensional field theory we have 24 new moduli from tensor multiplets as soon as we
try to enhance the gauge group to E8 × E8 in this way. Remember that in the language
of the heterotic string this large gauge group was meant to be the result of shrinking down
24 instantons to zero size. What we have therefore shown here is that shrinking down 24
instantons to zero size results in the appearance of 24 new tensor moduli.
Given that the appearance of tensor multiplets should be a nonperturbative phenomenon
in the heterotic string, it would seem unreasonable to expect them to appear when the target
space and vector bundle is smooth. At least in the case that the underlying K3 surface is
large, it is then clear that each tensor modulus can be tied to each shrunken instanton in
this picture. That is, one point-like instanton will result in one tensor modulus appearing.
Suppose we try to give size to some of the instantons. This should correspond to a
deformation of the complex structure of the Calabi–Yau threefold. We know that this should
result in the disappearance of (at least) one of the tensor multiplets and thus (at least) one
of the blow-ups in Θ. Thus the deformation has to disturb one of the curves of II∗ and thus
lower the size of the effective gauge group. What is important to notice is that 12 + n of
the small instantons are thus embedded in the E8 factor associated to C∞ and 12 − n of
the instantons are embedded in the E8 associated to C0 . To put this another way, when we
smooth everything out to obtain a theory with no extra tensor moduli we expect to have an
(E8 × E8 )-vector bundle which is a sum of two E8 -bundles, one of which has c2 = 12 + n and
the other with c2 = 12 − n.
This pretty well specifies exactly which heterotic string our type IIA string is dual to. For
a G-bundle on a K3 surface, where G is semi-simple and simply-connected, the topological
class of this bundle is specified by a map H4 (K3) → π3 (G) (for a clear explanation of this see
[153]). This may be viewed as given by the second Chern class of each sub-bundle associated
to each factor of G. In our case we fix the total second Chern class and so the only freedom
remaining is specified by how c2 of the bundle is split between the factors of G. Thus n
determines the class of our E8 × E8 bundle. We have arrived at the following:

Proposition 9 Let E be a sum, E1 ⊕ E2 , of two E8 -bundles on a smooth K3 surface such
that c2 (E1 ) = 12 + n and c2 (E2 ) = 12 − n. Then a heterotic string compactified on this
bundle on K3 is dual to (a limit of ) a type IIA string compactified on a Calabi–Yau threefold
which is an elliptic fibration with a section over the Hirzebruch surface Fn .
86

Our main assumption here is that the type IIA string on the Calabi–Yau manifold really is
dual to a heterotic string. If it is, then we have certainly identified the correct one subject
to the provisos of proposition 6.
This proposition first appeared in [135]. Although virtually all of the mathematics above
has been copied from that paper our presentation has been slightly different. Rather than
take the limit of decompactifying a T 2 in a heterotic string on K3 × T 2 , the line of attack in
[135] was effectively to decompactify the dual type IIA string (or its mirror partner, the type
IIB string) to a twelve-dimensional theory compactified on a Calabi–Yau manifold. It is not
clear whether this twelve-dimensional “F-theory” exists in the usual sense of ten-dimensional
string theory or eleven-dimensional M-theory or whether it serves simply as useful mnemonic
for the above analysis. Another point of view of F-theory is to think of it as the type IIB
string compactified down to six dimensions on Θ (see, for example, [154] for some nice results
along these lines). The fact that Θ is not a Calabi–Yau space is corrected for by placing fixed
D-branes within it. Again this is essentially equivalent to the above. The key ingredient to
associate to the term “F-theory” is the elliptic fibration structure. Whether one wishes to
think of this in terms of a mysterious twelve-dimensional theory or a type IIA string or a
type IIB string is up to the reader.
The above proposition establishing the link between how the 24 of the second Chern class
is divided between the two E8 ’s, and over which Hirzebruch surface X is elliptically fibred,
is in agreement with all the relevant conjectured dual pairs of [103] and [142] for example.
The case of n = 12 was established in [132].
The appearance of tensor moduli for small instantons was first noted in [146]. Since
we are not allowing ourselves to appeal to M-theory or D-branes in these lectures we will
not reproduce the argument here but just note that all necessary information appears to be
contained in the type IIA approach we use here.

6.4

Aspects of the E8 × E8 string

Let us now follow the analysis of [135, 145] and continue to explore the duality between the
type IIA string on X and the E8 × E8 heterotic string.
In the previous section we looked at the case of fixing hypermultiplet moduli in order to
break none of the E8 × E8 gauge group. We should ask the opposite question of what the
gauge group is at a generic point in the hypermultiplet moduli space. We shall do this as
follows. If any of the E8 × E8 gauge group remains unbroken we expect either of our curves
C0 or C∞ to contain part of the discriminant locus, ∆. Let us focus on C0 . Split off the part
of the discriminant not contained in C0 by putting
∆ = NC0 + ∆′ ,

(149)

where N ≥ 0 and ∆′ does not contain C0 . Since the only way that the intersection number
of two algebraic curves in an algebraic surface can be negative is if one of the curves contains
87

the other, we have
∆′ .C0 ≥ 0.

(150)

24
.
n

(151)

Following (147) we have, for n ≥ 0,
N ≥ 12 −

Similarly we may analyze the divisors A and B to obtain the respective orders, L and K, to
which a and b vanish on C0 . This gives
8
n
12
K ≥6− .
n
L≥4−

(152)

We may now use table 4 to determine the fibre over a generic point in C0 . Repeating this
procedure for the other “primordial” E8 along C∞ shows that no singular fibres are required
there for n ≥ 0.
We see that in the case n > 2, we will have singular fibres over C0 generating a curve
of singularities within X. Thus we expect an enhanced gauge group. Loosely speaking, the
gauge group can be read from the last column of table 4. The only thing we have to worry
about is the monodromy of section 5.2 — it may be that there is monodromy on the singular
fibres as we move about C0 . If ∆′ .C0 = 0 then there can be no monodromy since the fibre is
the same over every point of C0 . This occurs for n = 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 12. When n = 7, 9, 10, 11,
the fibre admits no symmetry and thus there cannot be any monodromy. Therefore, the
only time we have to worry about monodromy is for the IV∗ fibre in the case n = 5. There
is indeed monodromy in this case [149]. (See [155] for an account of this in terms of “Tate’s
algorithm” or [156] for an alternative approach.) Thus, whereas one associates E6 with a
type IV∗ fibre, this becomes F4 from figure 5 when n = 5. The gauge algebras for generic
moduli are summarized in table 5.
This agrees nicely with the heterotic picture. For a given value of c2 of a bundle, find
the largest possible structure group, H, of a vector bundle. Then the desired gauge group,
G, will be the centralizer of H within E8 × E8 . One “rough and ready” approach to this
question is as follows. Consider an H-bundle E with fibre in an irreducible representation,
R, of the structure group. The Dolbeault index theorem on the K3 surface then gives [9]
dim H 0 (E) − dim H 1 (E) + dim H 2 (E) =

Z

S

td(T ) ∧ ch(E)

(153)

= 2 rank(R) − l(R)c2 (E),
where l(R) is the index of R using the conventions of [157]. If E really is a strict H-bundle
with fibre R, it should have no nonzero global sections, otherwise the structure group would
88

n
≤2
3
4
5
6
7
8
≥9

L K N Fibre Mon.
G
H0
0 0 0
I0
E8
2 2 4
IV
su(3) E6
∗
2 3 6
I0
so(8) so(8)
3 4 8 IV∗
Z2
F4
G2
∗
3 4 8 IV
E6 su(3)
3 5 9 III∗
E7 su(2)
∗
3 5 9 III
E7 su(2)
∗
4 5 10 II
E8

Table 5: Generic gauge symmetries, G.
be a strict subgroup of H. Thus H 0 (E) is trivial. Similarly, by Serre duality, we expect the
same for H 2 (E). Thus, the right hand side of (153) must be non-positive. That is,
c2 (E) ≥

2 rank(R)
,
l(R)

(154)

for any irreducible representation, R. The bundle with c2 = 12 + n may have the full E8 as
structure group so one E8 of the E8 × E8 will be broken generically for any n ≥ 0. Table 5
then shows how the other E8 is broken down to G by a bundle with structure group H0 and
c2 = 12 − n. For example, the 3 of su(3) has l(3) = 1 and so c2 of a generic su(3)-bundle
with no global sections is at least 6. This is why it appears on the row for n = 6 in the table.
Note that there need not exist a bundle that saturates the bound in (154) and so we
cannot reproduce all of the rows in table 5. For example, in the case n = 3 one sees that
(154) does not rule out a bundle with the full E8 structure group but we see that only
an E6 -bundle is expected. See [133] for a discussion of this. It is interesting to note that
proposition 9 implies that su(3) must appear as the gauge symmetry in the case n = 3 and
so the E8 -bundle must not exist. If a smooth E8 -bundle on a K3 surface with c2 = 9 is
discovered it will violate proposition 9.
The cases n = 9, 10, 11 are somewhat peculiar since we appear to be suggesting that
we have a bundle with trivial structure group and yet c2 > 0. Clearly this is not possible
classically. The fact that classical reasoning is breaking down somewhat can be seen from
the fact that the reasoning of section 6.3 applies to this case and we have 12 − n tensor
multiplets. That is, we have 12 − n point-like instantons which cannot be given nonzero size.
The fact that n ≤ 12 can be understood from both the type IIA side and the heterotic
side. In the case of our elliptic fibration over Fn , if n > 12 then (L, K, N) as determined
from (151) and (152) is at least (4, 6, 12). As discussed in section 6.2, this means that we
may redefine L to absorb C0 to reduce the fibre to something in the list in figure 9. This kills
KX = 0 however and so we do not have a Calabi–Yau space. On the heterotic side, c2 < 0
89

(n)

(n − 1)

(n − 1)

(−n)

(−n + 1)
Fn−1

∆′
Fn

(−n)

Figure 11: The transition n → n − 1.
would be a clear violation of (154). One might worry about “point-like anti-instantons” but
such objects would break supersymmetry and as such do not solve the equations of motion.
In section 5.7 we discussed extremal transitions between Calabi–Yau manifolds which,
in the heterotic language, corresponded to unwrapping part of the gauge bundle around the
K3 surface and rewrapping it around the T 2 . Such transitions are not of much interest to
us in this section as we are concerned only with the K3 part of the story. There are other
possible extremal transitions which will effect us though. One kind which is of interest are
ones which will take us from an elliptic fibration over Fn to another elliptic fibration over
Fn−1 . In the heterotic string this will correspond to a transition from splitting the E8 × E8
bundle into two bundles with c2 equal to 12 + n and 12 − n, to a splitting of 12 + n − 1 and
12 − n + 1 respectively. In this way we may “join up” all the theories considered so far into
one connected moduli space. This phenomenon was first observed in [146] but we will again
follow the argument as presented in [135, 145].
As explained in section 6.3, when the E8 × E8 heterotic string has a point-like instanton,
we expect the dual Calabi–Yau space for the type IIA string to admit a blow-up in the base,
Θ, of the elliptic fibration. When all 24 instantons are point-like we saw this as a collision
between a curve of II∗ fibres and other parts of the discriminant locus as shown in figure 10.
Let us concentrate on what happens when one of these points is blown up.
As in section 6.3, we use ∆′ to denote the part of discriminant left over after we subtract
the contribution from the two curves of II∗ fibres. In the first diagram in figure 11 we show
locally how ∆′ loops around a collision between it and a line, C∞ , of II∗ fibres together with
the class, f , that passes though this point. Now when we do the blow-up by switching on a
scalar in a tensor multiplet we go to the middle diagram. The exceptional divisor is a line of
self-intersection −1. The line that was in the class f also becomes a (−1)-line. The middle
diagram of figure 11 is obviously symmetric and we may blow-down the latter (−1)-curve to
push the loop onto the bottom line of II∗ fibres as shown in the last diagram.
The effect of this is to change C∞ into a line of self-intersection n − 1 and C0 into a line
of self-intersection −n + 1. Thus we have turned Fn into Fn−1 . It is also clear that we have
90

moved the small instanton from one of the E8 ’s into the other E8 . Thus we may connect
up all our theories which are elliptic fibrations over Fn . Note that the use of tensor moduli
means that we do not expect a perturbative interpretation of this process in the heterotic
string language.

6.5

The Spin(32)/Z2 heterotic string

Now that we can content ourselves with the knowledge that we know how to build a type
IIA dual to the generic E8 × E8 heterotic string on a K3 surface we turn our attention to the
Spin(32)/Z2 heterotic string. Whereas the topology of the E8 ×E8 bundle required specifying
how the 24 instantons were divided between the two E8 ’s, the Spin(32)/Z2 heterotic string
is quite different. In this case the gauge group is not simply-connected and the topology of
the bundle is not simply specified by c2 .
It will be important to recall some fundamentals of the construction of the Spin(32)/Z2
heterotic string from [158]. The 16 extra right-movers of the heterotic string are compactified
on an even self-dual lattice of definite signature. There are two such lattices, which we denote
Γ8 ⊕ Γ8 and Γ16 . The former is two copies of the root lattice of E8 × E8 with which we have
become well-acquainted in these talks. The second lattice is the “Barnes-Wall” lattice [15].
This may be constructed by supplementing the root lattice of so(32) by the weights of one
of its spinors. Such spinor weights are never of length squared 2 are so do not give massless
states. Thus, as far as massless states are concerned, the lattice is the root lattice of SO(32)
and the string states fill out the adjoint representation. Massive representations may fill out
spinor representations for one of the spinors and but we never have representation in the
vector representation or the other spinor representation. The gauge group can be viewed
as a Z2 quotient of Spin(32) which does not admit vector representations. Hence π1 of our
gauge group is Z2 . When we try to build Spin(32)/Z2 -bundles the situation is very similar
to real vector bundles over M where the fact that π1 (SO(d)) ∼
= Z2 leads to the notion of the
second “Stiefel-Whitney” class, w2 , of a bundle as an element of H 2 (M, Z2 ). Here we have a
similar object characterizing the topology of the bundle which we denote w̃2 . If w̃2 6= 0 then
bundles with fibre in the vector representation are obstructed just as spinor representations
are obstructed for non-spin bundles with w2 6= 0. See [159] for a detailed account of this.
Thus, rather than being classified by how 24 is split between second Chern class, which
was the case for the E8 × E8 string, the topological class of an Spin(32)/Z2 heterotic string
compactified over a K3 surface is characterized by w̃2 ∈ H 2 (S, Z2 ). Whereas elements w̃2 are
in one-to-one correspondence with the homotopy classes of Spin(32)/Z2 -bundles on a fixed
(marked) K3 surface, in our moduli space we are also allowed to vary the moduli of the K3
surface. Thus two elements of H 2 (S, Z2 ) should be considered to be equivalent if they can
be mapped to each other by a diffeomorphism of the K3 surface. That is,
w̃2 ∈

Γ3,19 /2Γ3,19
.
O+ (Γ3,19 )
91

(155)

It was shown in [159] that there are only three possibilities:
1. w̃2 = 0,
2. w̃2 6= 0 and w̃2 .w̃2 = 0 (mod 4),
3. w̃2 6= 0 and w̃2 .w̃2 = 2 (mod 4).
We will focus on the case w̃2 = 0 in this section. This will allow us to use the same
arguments as in the last section about shrinking instantons down to retrieve the entire
primordial gauge group. If w̃2 were not zero, the topology of the bundle would obstruct the
existence of arbitrary point-like instantons at smooth points in the K3 surface. See [159] for
an account of this.
We have seen already that if a perturbatively understood heterotic string is dual to a
limit of a type IIA string on Calabi–Yau threefold, X, then X must be an elliptic fibration
with a section over Fn , where 0 ≤ n ≤ 12. Thus, if our duality picture is going to continue
working for any Spin(32)/Z2 heterotic string then we must have already encountered it in
disguise as the E8 × E8 heterotic string for a particular n.
The statement that the Spin(32)/Z2 heterotic string compactified on a K3 surface is the
same thing as an E8 × E8 heterotic string compactified on a K3 surface should not come as a
surprise as the same thing has been known to be true for toroidal compactifications for some
time [61, 160]. The identification of the dilaton as the size of the base of X as a K3 fibration
has nothing to do with whether we deal with the E8 × E8 or the Spin(32)/Z2 string and
so the duality between these theories cannot effect the string coupling. Thus there must be
some T-duality statement that connects these two theories. This may be highly nontrivial
however, as it may mix up the notion of what constitutes the base of the bundle over K3 and
what constitutes the fibre. A construction of such a T-duality at a special point in moduli
space was given in [159].
Now let us return to the issue concerning the extra states in the Γ16 lattice not contained
in the root lattice of so(32). What is the dual analogue of these extra massive states coming
from the spinor of so(32)? Let us think in terms of the type IIA string compactified on a K3
surface versus the Spin(32)/Z2 heterotic string compactified on a 4-torus as in section 4.3.
We may switch off all the Wilson lines of the heterotic string compactification by rotating
the space-like 4-plane, Π, so that Γ4,20 ∩ Π⊥ ∼
= Γ16 . Now view this as the “fibre” of the
type IIA string compactified on X versus the heterotic string compactified on K3 × T 2 . This
restores the full so(32) gauge symmetry and so can be thought of as shrinking down all 24
instantons. As discussed in section 5.5 we may now vary the T 2 and the Wilson lines by
varying the 2-plane, ✵, in Υ ⊗Z R ∼
= R2,ρ , where Υ is the quantum Picard lattice of the
generic fibre of X as a K3 fibration. Thus we see that Υ ∼
= Γ2,2 ⊕ Γ16 . In other words, the
∼
Picard lattice of the generic K3 fibre of X is Γ1,1 ⊕ Γ16 = Γ1,17 and is therefore self-dual.
Let the limit of a type IIA string compactified on X0 be dual to the Spin(32)/Z2 heterotic
string compactified on a K3 surface (times a 2-torus of large area) with w̃2 = 0 and all the
92

instantons shrunk down and let X be the blow-up of X0 . This theory will have an so(32)
gauge symmetry. We know the following:
1. X is a K3 fibration and an elliptic fibration with a section over a Hirzebruch surface.
2. X0 contains a curve of singularities of type D16 .
3. The generic K3 fibre of X has a self-dual Picard lattice (of rank 18).
Let us construct X.
Table 4 tells is that the base, Θ, of X as an elliptic fibration will contain a curve of I∗12
fibres. We may put this curve along C0 , the isolated section of Fn . A generic fibre of X
as a K3 fibration will be a K3 surface built as an elliptic fibration with a I∗12 fibre (and,
generically, 6 I1 fibres). Let us denote this K3 surface as St . What is Pic(St )?
Let σ denote the section of St as an elliptic fibration “at infinity” guaranteed by the
Weierstrass form. Let R be the sublattice of Pic(St ) generated by the irreducible curves
within the fibres not intersecting σ. Let Φ be the set of sections. One may show [161]
disc(R) = |Φ|2 disc(Pic(St )),

(156)

where disc denotes the “discriminant” of a lattice, i.e., the determinant of the inner product
on the generators.
In our case, R is generated by a set of rational curves forming the Dynkin diagram for
D16 . Thus, disc(R) is the determinant of the Cartan matrix of D16 which is 4. In order for
Pic(St ) to be unimodular we see that we require exactly two sections. Writing an elliptic
fibration with two sections in Weierstrass form is easy. We are guaranteed one section at
infinity. Put the other section along (y = 0, x = p(s, t)). Thus the general Weierstrass form
with two sections is
y 2 = (x − p(s, t))(x2 + p(s, t)x + q(s, t)),
(157)
where

a(s, t) = q(s, t) − p(s, t)2
b(s, t) = −p(s, t)q(s, t).

(158)

From (147) the divisors P and Q, given by the zeros of p and q, are in the class 4C0 +(4+2n)f
and 8C0 + (8 + 4n)f respectively. The discriminant is
δ = 4a3 + 27b2
= (q + 2p2 )2 (4q − p2 ).

(159)

The fact that the discriminant factorizes will have some profound consequences. In terms of
divisor classes let us write ∆ = 2M1 + M2 , where M1 is the divisor given by q + 2p2 and M2
corresponds to 4q − p2 .
93

We know that 2M1 + M2 contains 18C0 from the I∗12 fibres. Using the fact that a and b
vanish to an order no greater than 2 and 3 respectively along C0 and the fact that M1 and
M2 must contain a nonnegative number of C0 and f , one may show that M1 contains 8C0
and M2 contains 2C0 as their contributions towards the I∗12 fibres. What remains is
M1′ = (8 + 4n)f
M2′ = 6C0 + (8 + 4n)f.

(160)

Putting M2′ .C0 ≥ 0 fixes n ≤ 4. There are no other constraints.
We have not yet achieved our goal in determining what n is for the Spin(32)/Z2 heterotic
string. All we know is that n ≤ 4. Note however that along the 8 + 4n zeros of M1 we have
a double zero of ∆. Thus, generically we have 8 + 4n parallel lines along the f direction of
I2 fibres. Thus means the gauge algebra acquires an extra su(2)8+4n factor. The necessary
appearance of an extra gauge symmetry can ultimately be traced to the way the determinant
factorized. We will denote this as sp(1)8+4n to fit in with later analysis. It is very striking
how different this behaviour is from the E8 × E8 analysis of the last section. In the latter
case we acquired 24 massless tensors when the instantons were shrunk down to zero size,
whereas for the Spin(32)/Z2 heterotic string we acquire new massless gauge fields.
The natural thing to do would be to identify each sp(1) with a small instanton. To do
this fixes n = 4 as one can have 24 small instantons, at least in the case that the underlying
K3 surface is smooth and w̃2 = 0. Thus we arrive at the following
Proposition 10 The Spin(32)/Z2 heterotic string compactified smoothly on a K3 surface
with w̃2 = 0 is dual to (a limit of ) the type IIA string compactified on an elliptic fibration
over F4 .
This proposition depends on the assumptions governing proposition 6 and the somewhat
schematic way we associated each of the sp(1) factors to a small instanton to show n = 4.
Another way [135] to argue n = 4 is that the generic point in moduli space of n = 4
theories has gauge symmetry so(8) and then compare to the analysis in section 6.4. We
can try to break as much of so(32) as possible by finding the largest subalgebra of so(32)
consistent with (154). Since w̃2 = 0 we may consider vector representations in which case
so(24) is the largest such algebra with c2 = 24 and this breaks so(32) down to so(8). A
glance at table 5 then confirms that n = 4.
Actually, the analysis of the Spin(32)/Z2 heterotic string was first done by Witten [152],
where the appearance of the sp(1) factors from small instantons was argued directly. Unfortunately this involves methods beyond the scope of these talks. It is worth contrasting
Witten’s method with the above. It is a remarkable achievement of string duality that the
same answer results.
We may consider a specialization of the moduli to bring together some of the components
of M1′ along f . Suppose we bring k of the 24 lines together. This will produce an I2k line
94

I2

I2

I2

I2

I2

I6

I1
*
I 12

*
I 12

C0
f

f

f

f

C0
f

f

Figure 12: Three so(32) point-like instantons coalescing to form sp(3).
of fibres. As usual we have to worry about monodromy to get the full gauge group. In
this case the transverse collision between the I2k line and the I∗12 line produces monodromy
acting on the I2k fibres to give an sp(k) gauge symmetry.33 This corresponds to k of the
24 point-like instantons coalescing [152]. We show an example of this in figure 12. As an
extreme case, all 24 instantons may be pushed to the same point. This results in a gauge
algebra of so(32) ⊕ sp(24).
As we said above, it is interesting to contrast the behaviour of the point-like E8 instantons with the point-like so(32) instantons. The former produced massless tensor multiplets
whereas the latter produce extra massless vector multiplets to enhance the gauge group. Of
course, since both theories are meant to live in the same moduli space for n = 4, it should be
possible to continuously deform one type of point-like instanton into another. This may well
require a deformation of the base K3 surface as well as the bundle. The T-duality analysis
of [159] should provide a good starting point for such a description.

6.6

Discussion of the heterotic string

We have analyzed both the E8 × E8 and Spin(32)/Z2 heterotic string compactified on a
K3 surface in terms of a dual type IIA string compactified on an elliptically fibred Calabi–
Yau threefold. In both cases we discovered curious nonperturbative behaviour associated to
point-like instantons.
It is worth noting that in the case of the Spin(32)/Z2 string we appear to have acquired
a free lunch concerning the analysis of the gauge group. To see this note the following.
In old perturbative string theory a type IIA string compactified on a Calabi–Yau manifold
never has a nonabelian gauge group. Similarly a heterotic string may have a subgroup of the
33

Actually, since the f curves are topologically spheres, there had better be more than one point within
them around which there is nontrivial monodromy. There are three other points within each f curve where
there is monodromy provided by non-transverse collisions of f with what is left of the discriminant. We
show this on one of the f curves in figure 12. We omit this on the other f curves to make the figure more
readable.

95

original E8 × E8 or Spin(32)/Z2 as its gauge group together with perhaps a little more from
massless strings. This latter can only have rank up to a certain value limited by the central
charge of the corresponding conformal field theory (see, for example, [108] for a discussion
of this). In the case of point-like instantons we have claimed above to have found gauge
algebras as large as so(32) ⊕ sp(24). Such a gauge group must be nonperturbative from both
the type IIA and heterotic point of view.
When discussing duality one would normally claim that its power lies in its ability to
relate nonperturbative aspects of one theory to perturbative aspects of another. This then
allows the nonperturbative quantities to be calculated. In the above we appear to have
discovered things about a subject that was nonperturbative in both theories at the same
time! How did we do this? The answer is that we first related perturbative nonabelian
gauge groups in the heterotic string to curves of orbifold singularities in the type IIA picture.
To do this the curves of singularities were always formed by each K3 fibre of X, as a K3
fibration, acquiring a singular point. There is no reason why a curve of singularities need be
in this form — it may be completely contained in a bad fibre and not seen by the generic
fibre at all. Why should the type IIA string intrinsically care about the fibration structure?
Assuming it does not, this latter kind of curve should have just as much right to produce
an enhanced gauge group as those we could understand perturbatively from the heterotic
string. This is exactly the type of curve that gives the sp(24) gauge symmetry which is now
nonperturbative in terms of the heterotic string.
The example of heterotic-heterotic duality studied in section 5.6 gives a clear picture
of how nonperturbative effects are viewed in this way. Begin with a perturbative gauge
group in the heterotic string. This corresponds to a curve of singularities in the type IIA’s
K3 fibration passing through each generic fibre. Heterotic-heterotic duality corresponds to
exchanging the two P1 ’s in the base of the Calabi–Yau viewed as an elliptic fibration. This
gives another K3 fibration but now the curve of singularities lies totally within a bad fibre.
Thus it has become a nonperturbative gauge group for the dual heterotic string.
An issue which is very interesting but we do not have time to discuss here concerns the
appearance of extra massless hypermultiplets at special points in the moduli space. This
question appears to be rather straight forward in the case of hypermultiplets in the adjoint
representation, as shown in [162]. The more difficult question of other representations has
been analyzed in [96, 145, 149, 155, 163]. It is essential to do this analysis to complete the
picture of possible phase transitions in terms of Higgs transitions in the heterotic string. As
usual, in discussions about duality, it also hints at previously unsuspected relationships in
algebraic geometry.
Another very important issue we have not mentioned so far concerns anomalies. The heterotic string compactified on a K3 surface produces a chiral theory with potential anomalies.
This puts constraints on the numbers of allowed massless supermultiplets (see [164] for a
discussion of this). One constraint may be reduced to the condition [165, 166, 167]
273 − 29nT − nH + nV = 0,
96

(161)

where nT , nH and nV count the number of massless tensors, hypermultiplets, and vectors
respectively. The reason we have been able to ignore this seemingly important constraint is
that, assuming one does the geometry of elliptic fibrations correctly, it always appears to be
obeyed. At present this appears to be another string miracle!
 As an example consider the following. Compactify the E8 × E8 heterotic string, with c2 split as 12 + n
and 12 − n between the two E8 factors, on a K3 surface so that the unbroken gauge symmetry is precisely
E8 . This means that the corresponding elliptic threefold, X, has a curve of II∗ fibres which we may
assume lies along C0 in the Hirzebruch surface Fn . We will calculate nT , nH , and nV . What is left of
the divisors A, B, and ∆ after subtracting the contribution from the curve of II∗ fibres is given by
A′ = 4C0 + (8 + 4n)f
B ′ = 7C0 + (12 + 6n)f

(162)

∆′ = 14C0 + (24 + 12n)f.
B ′ collides with C0 generically 12 − n times. Each of these points corresponds to a point-like instanton
required to produce the E8 gauge group. Each such point must be blown up within the base to produce
a Calabi–Yau threefold. Thus we have 12 − n massless tensor multiplets in addition to the one from
the six-dimensional dilaton. Since the gauge group is E8 , we have 248 massless vectors furnishing the
adjoint representation.
To count the massless hypermultiplets we require h2,1 (X). It is relatively simple to compute h1,1 (X)
(assuming there is a finite number of sections) as this is given by 2, from the Hirzebruch surface, plus
12 − n from the blow-ups within the base, plus 1 from the generic fibre, plus 8 from II∗ fibres. That is,
h1,1 (X) = 23−n. Now h2,1 may be determined from the Euler characteristic of X, χ(X) = 2(h1,1 −h2,1 ).
To find this, recall that the Euler characteristic of a smooth bundle is given by the product of the Euler
characteristic of the base multiplied by the Euler characteristic of the fibre. Thanks to the nice way Euler
characteristics behave under surgery, we may thus apply this rule to each part of fibration separately.
The Euler characteristic of any fibre is given by N in table 4.
Over most of the base, the fibre is a smooth elliptic curve which has Euler characteristic zero. Thus
only the degenerate fibres contribute to our calculation. We have a curve of II∗ fibres over C0 which
contributes 10 × 2. The rest of the contribution comes from ∆′ . Let us determine the geometry of ∆′ .
Firstly we know that, prior to blowing up the base, ∆′ has 12 − n double points as seen in the upper
part of figure 10. Secondly, whenever A′ and B ′ collide, which happens at A′ .B ′ = 24n + 104 points, ∆′
will have a cusp (assuming everything is generic). Naı̈vely, the Euler characteristic of ∆′ can be given
by the adjun
− ∆′ .(∆′ + K) = −596 − 130n.
(163)
However, each cusp will increase this by value by 2 and each double point by 1. In addition, when we
do the blow-up of the base, the double points will be resolved and an additional 1 must be added for
each double point. Thus
χ(∆′ ) = −596 − 130n + 2(24n + 104) + 2(12 − n)
= −364 − 84n.

(164)

Over most of the points in ∆′ the fibre will be type I1 but there will be type II fibres over each cusp.

97

Thus the Euler characteristic of X is given by
χ(X) = 10.2 + 1.(−364 − 84n − (24n + 104)) + 2.(24n + 104)
= −240 − 60n,

(165)

and so h2,1 (X) = 143 + 29n. To obtain the number of hypermultiplets we add one to this figure from
the four-dimensional dilaton in the type IIA string. In summary, we have
nT = 13 − n
nH = 144 + 29n

(166)

nV = 248.
It can be seen that this satisfies (161). See [164, 145] for more examples.

In section 6.5 we analyzed the Spin(32)/Z2 heterotic string compactified on a K3 surface
with w̃2 = 0. What about the case w̃2 6= 0? An example of this was studied in [159] based
on the construction of Gimon and Polchinski [168]. This uses open string models which
P
we have not discussed here. In this case, w̃2 is dual to 21 16
i=1 Ci , where {Ci } are sixteen
2
disjoint (−2)-curves. The fact that such a class lies in H (S, Z) can be seen in [16]. Such
a w̃2 is conjectured to be dual to the case of the E8 × E8 heterotic string with n = 0.
It would be interesting to analyze this from the elliptic fibration point if view presented
here. One indication that things will work is that the algebra sp(8) appears naturally in the
nonperturbative group in the n = 0 case from the analysis following (160). This agrees with
the model of Gimon and Polchinski. The problem is that we have the full so(32) present as
a gauge symmetry which does not appear in Gimon and Polchinski’s model. One can also
show that massless tensor multiplets appear from the type IIA approach. These issues are
resolved in [156].
An interesting issue we had no time to pursue is that concerning what happens as we
take the coupling of the heterotic string to be strong. All of the above analysis was done for
a weakly-coupled heterotic string. It has been noted that one can expect some kind of phase
transition to occur as the coupling reaches a particular value [133]. This can be analyzed in
the context of elliptic fibrations [145].
As concluding remarks to the discussion concerning the heterotic string on a K3 surface
we should note that this analysis is far from complete. In the case of the type IIA and type
IIB string we were able to give a fairly complete picture of the entire moduli space. For the
heterotic string we have been able to study a few components of the moduli space and a few
points at extremal transitions. A first requirement to study the full moduli space will be a
classification of elliptic fibrations. A more immediate shortcoming in our discussion is that
we do not yet have an explicit map between the moduli of the elliptically fibered Calabi–
Yau manifold and the K3 surface and bundle on which the heterotic string is compactified.
This must be understood before we can really answer questions such as what happens when
point-like instantons collide with singularities of the K3 surface.
98

Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my collaborators M. Gross and D. Morrison for their contribution to
much of the work discussed above. I would also like to thank them for answering a huge
number of questions concerning algebraic geometry many of which I should have looked up
in a book first. I thank J. Louis, with whom I have also collaborated on some of the work
covered above. It is a pleasure to thank O. Aharony, S. Kachru, S. Katz, E. Silverstein,
and H. Tye for useful conversations and of course B. Greene and K. T. Mahanthappa for
organizing TASI 96. The author was supported by an NSF grant while at Cornell University,
where part of these lecture notes were written, and is supported in part by DOE grant DEFG02-96ER40959 at Rutgers University.

References
[1] R. W. H. T. Hudson, Kummer’s Quartic Surface, Cambridge, 1905.
[2] S. W. Hawking and C. N. Pope, Symmetry Breaking by Instantons in Supergravity, Nucl.
Phys. B146 (1978) 381–392.
[3] S.-T. Yau, Calabi’s Conjecture and Some New Results in Algebraic Geometry, Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. 74 (1977) 1798–1799.
[4] M. J. Duff, B. E. W. Nilsson, and C. N. Pope, Compactification of d = 11 Supergravity on
K3 × T 3 , Phys. Lett. 129B (1983) 39–42.
[5] R. Messner and A. Gogna, K2 Mountain of Mountains, Oxford University Press, 1981.
[6] A. Weil, Final Report on Contract AF 18(603)–57, 1958.
[7] A. Weil, Collected Works, volume 2, Springer-Verlag, 1979.
[8] P. Griffiths and J. Harris, Principles of Algebraic Geometry, Wiley-Interscience, 1978.
[9] T. Eguchi, P. Gilkey, and A. Hansen, Gravitation, Gauge Theories and Differential Geometry,
Phys. Rept. 66 (1980) 213–393.
[10] A. L. Besse, Einstein Manifolds, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1987.
[11] S. Salamon, Riemannian Geometry and Holonomy Groups,
Math. 201, Longman, 1989.

Pitman Research Notes in

[12] R. Bott and L. W. Tu, Differential Forms in Algebraic Topology, Springer-Verlag, New York,
1982.
[13] E. H. Spanier, Algebraic Topology, Springer-Verlag, 1966.

99

[14] J. P. Serre, A Course in Arithmetic, Springer-Verlag, 1973.
[15] J. H. Conway and N. J. A. Sloane, Sphere Packings, Lattices, and Groups, Springer-Verlag,
1993.
[16] W. Barth, C. Peters, and A. van de Ven, Compact Complex Surfaces, Springer, 1984.
[17] C. Borcea, Diffeomorphisms of a K3 surface, Math. Ann. 275 (1986) 1–4.
[18] T. Matumoto, On Diffeomorphisms of a K3 Surface, in M. Nagata et al, editor, “Algebraic and Topological Theories — to the memory of Dr. Takehiko Miyaka”, pages 616–621,
Kinukuniya, Tokyo, 1985.
[19] S. K. Donaldson, Polynomial Invariants for Smooth Four-Manifolds, Topology 29 (1990)
257–315.
[20] G. Moore, Finite in All Directions, hep-th/9305139.
[21] N. Hitchin, On Compact Four-Dimensional Einstien Manifolds, J. Diff Geom. 9 (1974)
435–442.
[22] A. Todorov, Applications of Kähler–Einstein–Calabi–Yau Metric to Moduli of K3 Surfaces,
Inv. Math. 61 (1980) 251–265.
[23] D. R. Morrison, Some Remarks on the Moduli of K3 Surfaces, in K. Ueno, editor, “Classification of Algebraic and Analytic Manifolds”, Progress in Math. 39, pages 303–332, Birkhäuser,
1983.
[24] R. Kobayashi and A. N. Todorov, Polarized Period Map for Generalized K3 Surfaces and the
Moduli of Einstein Metrics, Tôhoku Math. J. (2) 39 (1987) 341–363.
[25] N. D. Allan, Maximality of Some Arithmetic Groups; A Note of the Arithmetic of the Orthogonal Group, An. Acad. Brasil. Ci. 38 (1966) 223–227 and 243–244.
[26] I. Satake, On a Generalization of the Notion of Manifold, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 42
(1956) 359–363.
[27] L. Dixon, J. A. Harvey, C. Vafa, and E. Witten, Strings on Orbifolds, Nucl. Phys. B261
(1985) 678–686, and B274 (1986) 285–314.
[28] R. Kobayashi, Einstein-Kähler V-Metrics on Open Satake V-Surfaces with Isolated Quotient
Singularities, Math. Ann. 272 (1985) 385–398.
[29] W. Fulton and J. Harris, Representation Theory: A First Course, Springer-Verlag, 1991.
[30] P. Du Val, Homographies, Quaternions and Rotations, Oxford, 1964.
[31] F. Klein, Vorlesen über das Ikosaeder und die Auflösung der Gleichungen vom fünften Grade,
Teubner, Leipzig 1884.

100

[32] R. Miranda, Smooth Models for Elliptic Threefolds, in R. Friedman and D. R. Morrison,
editors, “The Birational Geometry of Degenerations”, Birkhauser, 1983.
[33] P. Slodowy, Simple Singularities and Simple Algebraic Groups, Lecture Notes in Mathematics 815, Springer-Verlag, 1980.
[34] T. Eguchi and A. J. Hanson, Asymptotically Flat Self-Dual Solutions to Euclidean Gravity,
Phys. Lett. 74B (1978) 249–251.
[35] G. W. Gibbons and S. W. Hawking, Gravitational Multi-Instantons, Phys. Lett. 78B (1978)
430–432.
[36] N. Hitchin, Polygons and Gravitons, Math. Proc. Cam. Phil. Soc. 85 (1979) 465–476.
[37] A. H. Durfee, Fifteen Characterizations of Rational Double Points and Simple Critical Points,
l’Enseign. Math. 25 (1979) 131–163.
[38] A. Dimca, Singularities and Topology of Hypersurfaces, Springer-Verlag, 1992.
[39] M. Green, J. Schwarz, and E. Witten, Superstring Theory, Cambridge University Press,
1987, 2 volumes.
[40] P. S. Aspinwall, The Moduli Space of N = 2 Superconformal Field Theories, in E. Gava et al.,
editors, “1994 Summer School in High Energy Physics and Cosmology”, pages 352–401, World
Scientific, 1995, hep-th/9412115.
[41] P. Ginsparg, Applied Conformal Field Theory, in E. Brésin and J. Zinn-Justin, editors,
“Fields, Strings, and Critical Phenomena”, pages 1–168, Elsevier Science Publishers B.V.,
1989.
[42] D. Friedan, Nonlinear Models in 2 + ε Dimensions, Ann. Phys. 163 (1985) 318–419.
[43] C. G. Callan, D. Friedan, E. J. Martinec, and M. J. Perry, Strings in Background Fields,
Nucl. Phys. B262 (1985) 593–609.
[44] C. G. Callan, J. A. Harvey, and A. Strominger, World Sheet Approach to Heterotic Instantons
and Solitons, Nucl. Phys. B359 (1991) 611–634.
[45] J. A. Harvey and A. Strominger, The Heterotic String is a Soliton, Nucl. Phys. B449 (1995)
535–552, hep-th/9504047.
[46] L. Alvarez-Gaumé and D. Z. Freedman, Geometric Structure and Ultraviolet Finiteness in
the Supersymmetric σ-Model, Commun. Math. Phys. 80 (1981) 443–451.
[47] L. Alvarez-Gaumé and P. Ginsparg, Finiteness of Ricci-flat Supersymmetric Nonlinear σModels, Commun. Math. Phys. 102 (1985) 311–326.
[48] T. Banks and N. Seiberg, Nonperturbative Infinities, Nucl. Phys. B273 (1986) 157–164.

101

[49] A. Belopolsky and B. Zwiebach, Who Changes the String Coupling?, Nucl. Phys. B472
(1996) 109–138, hep-th/9511077.
[50] N. Seiberg, Observations on the Moduli Space of Superconformal Field Theories, Nucl. Phys.
B303 (1988) 286–304.
[51] S. Cecotti, N = 2 Landau-Ginzburg vs. Calabi–Yau Sigma Model: Nonperturbative Aspects,
Int. J. Mod. Phys. A6 (1991) 1749–1814.
[52] P. S. Aspinwall and D. R. Morrison, String Theory on K3 Surfaces, in B. Greene and
S.-T. Yau, editors, “Mirror Symmetry II”, pages 703–716, International Press, 1996, hepth/9404151.
[53] P. S. Aspinwall and D. R. Morrison, Mirror Symmetry and the Moduli Space of K3 Surfaces,
in preparation.
[54] A. Borel, Some Metric Properties of Arithmetic Quotients of Symmetric Spaces and an
Extention Theorem, J. Diff. Geom. 6 (1972) 543–560.
[55] S.-T. Yau, editor, Essays on Mirror Manifolds, International Press, 1992.
[56] E. Martinec, Criticality, Catastrophes and Compactifications, in L. Brink et al., editors,
“Physics and Mathematics of Strings”, World Scientific, 1990.
[57] I. V. Dolgachev, Mirror symmetry for lattice polarized K3-surfaces, J. Math. Sciences 81
(1996) 2599–2630, alg-geom/9502005.
[58] C. Borcea, K3 Surfaces with Involution and Mirror Pairs of Calabi–Yau Manifolds, in
B. Greene and S.-T. Yau, editors, “Mirror Symmetry II”, pages 717–743, International Press,
1996.
[59] H. Pinkham, Singularités exceptionnelles, la dualité étrange d’Arnold et les surfaces K3, C.
R. Acad. Sci. Paris 284A (1977) 615–618.
[60] B. R. Greene and M. R. Plesser, Duality in Calabi–Yau Moduli Space, Nucl. Phys. B338
(1990) 15–37.
[61] K. S. Narain, New Heterotic String Theories in Uncompactified Dimensions < 10, Phys.
Lett. 169B (1986) 41–46.
[62] K. S. Narain, M. H. Samadi, and E. Witten, A Note on the Toroidal Compactification of
Heterotic String Theory, Nucl. Phys. B279 (1987) 369–379.
[63] A. Giveon, M. Porrati, and E. Rabinovici, Target Space Duality in String Theory, Phys.
Rept. 244 (1994) 77–202, hep-th/9401139.
[64] E. Cremmer and B. Julia, The SO(8) Supergravity, Nucl. Phys. B159 (1979) 141–212.
[65] E. Witten, Search For a Realistic Kaluza-Klein Theory, Nucl. Phys. B186 (1981) 412–428.

102

[66] P. Hořava and E. Witten, Heterotic and Type I String Dynamics from Eleven Dimensions,
Nucl. Phys. B460 (1996) 506–524, hep-th/9510209.
[67] J. Strathdee, Extended Poincaré Supersymmetry, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A1 (1987) 273–300.
[68] B. Julia, Group Disintegrations, in S. Hawking and M. Roček, editors, “Superspace and
Supergravity”, pages 331–350, Cambridge University Press, 1981.
[69] J. Polchinski, Dirichlet-Branes and Ramond-Ramond Charges, Phys. Rev. Lett. 75 (1995)
4724–4727, hep-th/9510017.
[70] C. Hull and P. Townsend, Unity of Superstring Dualities, Nucl. Phys. B438 (1995) 109–137,
hep-th/9410167.
[71] E. Witten, String Theory Dynamics in Various Dimensions, Nucl. Phys. B443 (1995)
85–126, hep-th/9503124.
[72] L. J. Dixon, V. Kaplunovsky, and C. Vafa, On Four-Dimensional Gauge Theories from
Type-II Superstrings, Nucl. Phys. B294 (1987) 43–82.
[73] P. S. Aspinwall, Enhanced Gauge Symmetries and K3 Surfaces, Phys. Lett. B357 (1995)
329–334, hep-th/9507012.
[74] E. Witten, Some Comments on String Dynamics, hep-th/9507121.
[75] A. Strominger, Massless Black Holes and Conifolds in String Theory, Nucl. Phys. B451
(1995) 96–108, hep-th/9504090.
[76] M. Bershadsky, V. Sadov, and C. Vafa, D-Strings on D-Manifolds, Nucl. Phys. B463 (1996)
398–414, hep-th/9510225.
[77] M. R. Douglas and G. Moore, D-branes, Quivers, and ALE Instantons, hep-th/9603167.
[78] L. Romans, Self-Duality for Interacting Fields: Covariant Field Equations for SixDimensional Chiral Supergravities, Nucl. Phys. B276 (1986) 71–92.
[79] P. S. Aspinwall, Some Relationships Between Dualities in String Theory, in “S-Duality
and Mirror Symmetry”, Nucl. Phys. (Proc. Suppl.) B46, pages 30–38, North Holland, 1996,
hep-th/9508154.
[80] J. H. Schwarz, An SL(2,Z) Multiplet of Type IIB Superstrings, Phys. Lett. B360 (1995)
13–18, hep-th/9508143.
[81] M. Duff, Strong/Weak Coupling Duality from the Dual String, Nucl. Phys. B442 (1995)
47–63, hep-th/9501030.
[82] A. Sen, Dyon-Monopole Bound States, Selfdual Harmonic Forms on the Multi-Monopole
Moduli Space, and SL(2,Z) Invariance in String Theory, Phys. Lett. B329 (1994) 217–221,
hep-th/9402032.

103

[83] C. Montonen and D. Olive, Magnetic Monopoles as Gauge Particles?, Phys. Lett. 72B (1977)
117–120.
[84] H. Osborn, Topological Charges for N = 4 Supersymmetric Gauge Theories and Monopoles
of Spin 1, Phys. Lett. 83B (1979) 321–326.
[85] A. Sen, Strong-Weak Coupling Duality in Four-Dimensional String Theory, Int. J. Mod.
Phys. A9 (1994) 3707–3750, hep-th/9402002.
[86] J. Dai, R. Leigh, and J. Polchinski, New Connections Between String Theories, Mod. Phys.
Lett. A4 (1989) 2073–2083.
[87] M. Dine, P. Huet, and N. Seiberg, Large and Small Radius in String Theory, Nucl. Phys.
B322 (1989) 301–316.
[88] P. S. Aspinwall and D. R. Morrison, U-Duality and Integral Structures, Phys. Lett. 355B
(1995) 141–149, hep-th/9505025.
[89] M. J. Duff, J. T. Liu, and J. Rahmfeld, Four-Dimensional String/String/String Triality,
Nucl. Phys. B459 (1996) 125–159, hep-th/9508094.
[90] J. H. Schwarz and A. Sen, Type IIA Dual of the Six-dimensional CHL Compactification,
Phys. Lett. B357 (1995) 323–328, hep-th/9507027.
[91] G. Cheeger and M. Gromoll, The Splitting Theorem for Manifolds of Non-Negative Ricci
Curvature, J. Diff. Geom. 6 (1971) 119–128.
[92] V. V. Nikulin, Finite Automorphism Groups of Kähler K3 Surfaces, Trans. Moscow Math.
Soc. 38 (1979) 71–135.
[93] S. Chaudhuri and D. A. Lowe, Type IIA-Heterotic Duals with Maximal Supersymmetry, Nucl.
Phys. B459 (1996) 113–124, hep-th/9508144.
[94] K. S. Narain, M. H. Sarmadi, and C. Vafa, Asymmetric Orbifolds, Nucl. Phys. B288 (1987)
551–577.
[95] D. Freed and C. Vafa, Global Anomalies on Orbifolds, Commun. Math. Phys. 110 (1987)
349–389.
[96] S. Ferrara, J. Harvey, A. Strominger, and C. Vafa, Second Quantized Mirror Symmetry, Phys.
Lett. 361B (1995) 59–65, hep-th/9505162.
[97] C. Vafa and E. Witten, Dual String Pairs With N = 1 and N = 2 Supersymmetry in Four
Dimensions, in “S-Duality and Mirror Symmetry”, Nucl. Phys. (Proc. Suppl.) B46, pages
225–247, North Holland, 1996, hep-th/9507050.
[98] S. Chaudhuri and D. A. Lowe, Monstrous String-String Duality, Nucl. Phys. B469 (1996)
21–36, hep-th/9512226.

104

[99] S. Chaudhuri, G. Hockney, and J. D. Lykken, Maximally Supersymmetric String Theories in
D < 10, Phys. Rev. Lett. 75 (1995) 2264–2267, hep-th/9505054.
[100] S. Chaudhuri and J. Polchinski, Moduli Space of CHL Strings, Phys. Rev. D52 (1995)
7168–7173, hep-th/9506048.
[101] N. Seiberg and E. Witten, Electric - Magnetic Duality, Monopole Condensation, and Confinement in N=2 Supersymmetric Yang-Mills Theory, Nucl. Phys. B426 (1994) 19–52, hepth/9407087.
[102] N. Seiberg and E. Witten, Monopoles, Duality and Chiral Symmetry Breaking in N=2 Supersymmetric QCD, Nucl. Phys. B431 (1994) 484–550, hep-th/9408099.
[103] S. Kachru and C. Vafa, Exact Results For N=2 Compactifications of Heterotic Strings, Nucl.
Phys. B450 (1995) 69–89, hep-th/9505105.
[104] E. Witten, New Issues in Manifolds of SU(3) Holonomy, Nucl. Phys. B268 (1986) 79–112.
[105] J. Bagger and E. Witten, Matter Couplings in N=2 Supergravity, Nucl. Phys. B222 (1983)
1–10.
[106] D. R. Morrison, Mirror Symmetry and the Type II String, in “S-Duality and Mirror Symmetry”, Nucl. Phys. (Proc. Suppl.) B46, pages 146–153, North Holland, 1996, hep-th/9512016.
[107] S. Mukai, Symplectic Structure of the Moduli Space of Sheaves on an Abelian or K3 Surface,
Invent. Math. 77 (1984) 101–116.
[108] P. S. Aspinwall and J. Louis, On the Ubiquity of K3 Fibrations in String Duality, Phys. Lett.
369B (1996) 233–242, hep-th/9510234.
[109] B. de Wit, P. Lauwers, and A. Van Proeyen, Lagrangians of N = 2 Supergravity-Matter
Systems, Nucl. Phys. B255 (1985) 569–608.
[110] B. de Wit and A. Van Proeyen, Potentials and Symmetries of General Gauged N=2
Supergravity–Yang–Mills Models, Nucl. Phys. B245 (1984) 89–117.
[111] S. Cecotti, S. Ferrara, and L. Girardello, Geometry of Type II Superstrings and the Moduli
of Superconformal Field Theories, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A4 (1989) 2475–2529.
[112] S. Ferrara and A. Van Proeyen, A Theorem on N=2 Special Kähler Product Manifolds, Class.
Quant. Grav. 6 (1989) L243–L247.
[113] A. Strominger and E. Witten, New Manifolds for Superstring Compactification, Commun.
Math. Phys. 101 (1985) 341–361.
[114] J. Distler and B. Greene, Some Exact Results on the Superpotential from Calabi–Yau compactifications, Nucl. Phys. B309 (1988) 295–316.

105

[115] M. Dine, N. Seiberg, X. G. Wen, and E. Witten, Nonperturbative Effects on the String
World-Sheet, Nucl. Phys. B278 (1986) 769–789, and Nucl. Phys. B289 (1987) 319–363.
[116] K. Oguiso, On Algebraic Fiber Space Structures on a Calabi-Yau 3-fold, Int. J. of Math. 4
(1993) 439–465.
[117] E. Witten, The N -Matrix Model and Gauged WZW Models, Nucl. Phys. B371 (1992)
191–245.
[118] P. S. Aspinwall and D. R. Morrison, Topological Field Theory and Rational Curves, Commun.
Math. Phys. 151 (1993) 245–262, hep-th/9110048.
[119] P. M. H. Wilson, The Kähler Cone on Calabi–Yau Threefolds, Invent. Math. 107 (1992)
561–583.
[120] M. Bershadsky, S. Cecotti, H. Ooguri, and C. Vafa, Holomorphic Anomalies in Topological
Field Theories, Nucl. Phys. B405 (1993) 279–304, hep-th/9302103.
[121] H. Ooguri and C. Vafa, Two-Dimensional Black Hole and Singularities of CY Manifolds,
Nucl. Phys. B463 (1996) 55–72, hep-th/9511164.
[122] A. Strominger, S.-T. Yau, and E. Zaslow, Mirror Symmetry is T-Duality, hep-th/9606040.
[123] M. Gross and P. M. H. Wilson, Mirror Symmetry via 3-Tori for a Class of Calabi-Yau
Threefolds, alg-geom/9608004.
[124] D. Morrison, The Geometry Underlying Mirror Symmetry, alg-geom/9608006.
[125] A. Klemm, W. Lerche, and P. Mayr, K3–Fibrations and Heterotic-Type II String Duality,
Phys. Lett. 357B (1995) 313–322, hep-th/9506112.
[126] B. H. Lian and S.-T. Yau, Mirror Maps, Modular Relations and Hypergeometric Series I,II,
in “S-Duality and Mirror Symmetry”, Nucl. Phys. (Proc. Suppl.) B46, pages 248–262, North
Holland, 1996, hep-th/9507151, hep-th/9507153.
[127] J. McCleary, User’s Guide to Spectral Sequence, Publish or Perish, 1985.
[128] S. Kachru et al., Nonperturbative Results on the Point Particle Limit of N=2 Heterotic String
Compactifications, Nucl. Phys. B459 (1996) 537–558, hep-th/9508155.
[129] A. Klemm et al., Self-Dual Strings and N=2 Supersymmetric Field Theory, Nucl. Phys.
B477 (1996) 746–766, hep-th/9604034.
[130] V. Kaplunovsky, J. Louis, and S. Theisen, Aspects of Duality in N=2 String Vacua, Phys.
Lett. 357B (1995) 71–75, hep-th/9506110.
[131] I. Antoniadis, E. Gava, K. S. Narain, and T. R. Taylor, N=2 Type II Heterotic Duality and
Higher Derivative F Terms, Nucl. Phys. B455 (1995) 109–130, hep-th/9507115.

106

[132] J. A. Harvey and G. Moore, Algebras, BPS States, and Strings, Nucl. Phys. B463 (1996)
315–368, hep-th/9510182.
[133] M. J. Duff, R. Minasian, and E. Witten, Evidence for Heterotic/Heterotic Duality, Nucl.
Phys. B465 (1996) 413–438, hep-th/9601036.
[134] P. S. Aspinwall and M. Gross, Heterotic-Heterotic String Duality and Multiple K3 Fibrations,
Phys. Lett. B382 (1996) 81–88, hep-th/9602118.
[135] D. R. Morrison and C. Vafa, Compactifications of F-Theory on Calabi–Yau Threefolds — I,
Nucl. Phys. B473 (1996) 74–92, hep-th/9602114.
[136] P. Green and T. Hübsch, Possible Phase Transitions Among Calabi–Yau Compactifications,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 61 (1988) 1163–1166.
[137] B. R. Greene, D. R. Morrison, and A. Strominger, Black Hole Condensation and the Unification of String Vacua, Nucl. Phys. B451 (1995) 109–120, hep-th/9504145.
[138] P. Candelas, P. Green, and T. Hübsch, Rolling Among Calabi–Yau Vacua, Nucl. Phys. B330
(1990) 49–102.
[139] M. Reid, The Moduli Space of 3-folds with K = 0 May Nevertheless be Irreducible, Math
Ann. 278 (1987) 329–334.
[140] T.-M. Chiang, B. R. Greene, M. Gross, and Y. Kanter, Black Hole Condensation and the
Web of Calabi-Yau Manifolds, in “S-Duality and Mirror Symmetry”, Nucl. Phys. (Proc.
Suppl.) B46, pages 248–262, North Holland, 1996, hep-th/9511204.
[141] A. C. Avram, P. Candelas, D. Jančic, and M. Mandelberg, On the Connectedness of Moduli
Spaces of Calabi-Yau Manifolds, Nucl. Phys. B465 (1996) 458–472, hep-th/9511230.
[142] G. Aldazabal, A. Font, L. E. Ibáñez, and F. Quevedo, Chains of N=2, D=4 Heterotic/Type
II Duals, Nucl. Phys. B461 (1996) 85–100, hep-th/9510093.
[143] P. Candelas and A. Font, Duality Between Webs of Heterotic and Type II Vacua, hepth/9603170.
[144] C. Vafa, Evidence for F-Theory, Nucl. Phys. B469 (1996) 403–418, hep-th/9602022.
[145] D. R. Morrison and C. Vafa, Compactifications of F-Theory on Calabi–Yau Threefolds — II,
Nucl. Phys. B476 (1996) 437–469, hep-th/9603161.
[146] N. Seiberg and E. Witten, Comments on String Dynamics in Six Dimensions, Nucl. Phys.
B471 (1996) 121–134, hep-th/9603003.
[147] N. Marcus and J. H. Schwarz, Field Theories That Have No Manifestly Lorentz-Invariant
Formulation, Phys. Lett. 115B (1982) 111–114.

107

[148] N. Seiberg, Non-trivial Fixed Points of The Renormalization Group in Six Dimensions, hepth/9609161.
[149] P. S. Aspinwall and M. Gross, The SO(32) Heterotic String on a K3 Surface, Phys. Lett.
B387 (1996) 735–742, hep-th/9605131.
[150] K. Kodaira, On Compact Analytic Surfaces II, Ann. Math. 77 (1963) 563–626.
[151] D. A. Cox and S. Zucker, Intersection Numbers of Sections of Elliptic Surfaces, Invent. Math.
53 (1979) 1–44.
[152] E. Witten, Small Instantons in String Theory, Nucl. Phys. B460 (1996) 541–559, hepth/9511030.
[153] E. Witten, Topological Tools in 10-Dimensional Physics, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A1 (1986) 39–64.
[154] A. Sen, F-theory and Orientifolds, Nucl. Phys. B475 (1996) 562–578, hep-th/9605150.
[155] M. Bershadsky et al., Geometric Singularities and Enhanced Gauge Symmetries., Nucl. Phys.
B481 (1996) 215–252, hep-th/9605200.
[156] P. S. Aspinwall, Point-like Instantons and the Spin(32)/Z2 Heterotic String, hep-th/9612108.
[157] R. Slansky, Group Theory for Unified Model Building, Phys. Rept. 79 (1981) 1–129.
[158] D. J. Gross, J. A. Harvey, E. Martinec, and R. Rohm, The Heterotic String, Phys. Rev. Lett.
54 (1985) 502–505.
[159] M. Berkooz et al., Anomalies, Dualities, and Topology of D = 6 N = 1 Superstring Vacua,
Nucl. Phys. B475 (1996) 115–148, hep-th/9605184.
[160] P. Ginsparg, On Toroidal Compactification of Heterotic Strings, Phys. Rev. D35 (1987)
648–654.
[161] R. Miranda and U. Persson, On Extremal Rational Elliptic Surfaces, Math. Z. 193 (1986)
537–558.
[162] S. Katz, D. R. Morrison, and M. R. Plesser, Enhanced Gauge Symmetry in Type II String
Theory, Nucl. Phys. B477 (1996) 105–140, hep-th/9601108.
[163] S. Katz and C. Vafa, Matter From Geometry, hep-th/9606086.
[164] J. H. Schwarz, Anomaly-Free Supersymmetric Models in Six Dimensions, Phys. Lett. B371
(1996) 223–230, hep-th/9512053.
[165] L. Alvarez-Gaumé and E. Witten, Gravitational Anomalies, Nucl. Phys. B234 (1984) 269–
330.
[166] M. B. Green, J. H. Schwarz, and P. C. West, Anomaly Free Chiral Theories in Six-Dimensions,
Nucl. Phys. B254 (1985) 327–348.

108

[167] A. Sagnotti, A Note on the Green-Schwarz mechanism in open string theories, Phys. Lett.
B294 (1992) 196–203, hep-th/9210127.
[168] E. G. Gimon and J. Polchinski, Consistency Conditions for Orientifolds and D-Manifolds,
Phys. Rev. D54 (1996) 1667–1676, hep-th/9601038.

109

