                                                                                                            BA-TH/02-437
                                                                                                         CERN-TH/2002-104
                                                                                                            hep-th/0207130




                                               The Pre-Big Bang Scenario
arXiv:hep-th/0207130v1 12 Jul 2002




                                                  in String Cosmology

                                                           M. Gasperini1 and G. Veneziano2

                                                       1 Dipartimento di Fisica , Università di Bari,

                                                         Via G. Amendola 173, 70126 Bari, Italy
                                                                            and
                                                  Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare, Sezione di Bari
                                                         Via G. Amendola 173, 70126 Bari, Italy

                                                        E-mail: maurizio.gasperini@ba.infn.it

                                                                 2 Theory Division, CERN,

                                                             CH-1211 Geneva 23, Switzerland

                                                          E-mail: gabriele.veneziano@cern.ch




                                                                          Abstract
                                         We review physical motivations, phenomenological consequences, and open problems
                                     of the so-called pre-big bang scenario in superstring cosmology.
Contents
1 Introduction                                                                                3
  1.1 Coping with a beginning of time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         5
  1.2 Inflation before the big bang . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     6
  1.3 Pre-big bang inflation and conformal frames . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         9
  1.4 Outline, notations and conventions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       13

2 String theory motivations                                                                 16
  2.1 Short- and large-distance motivations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       19
  2.2 Scale-factor duality without and with sources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       23
  2.3 O(d, d)-covariance of the cosmological equations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      31
  2.4 Kinematics of pre-big bang inflation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      39
  2.5 Frame-independence: Which is the “right” metric? . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          44

3 Initial conditions                                                                        47
  3.1 Quasi-homogeneous and inhomogeneous solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . .             48
  3.2 Asymptotic past triviality and symmetries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       51
  3.3 Pre-big bang inflation as gravitational collapse . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      54
  3.4 The case of spherical and planar symmetry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         57
  3.5 Adding p-forms and BKL chaotic behaviour . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          64
  3.6 Is pre-big bang cosmology fine-tuned? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       67

4 Amplification of quantum fluctuations                                                     69
  4.1 “Frame” independence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      71
  4.2 Choice of the “gauge” for scalar perturbations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      74
  4.3 Canonical variables and normalization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       80
  4.4 Spectral distribution of the energy density . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     87
  4.5 Duality of the perturbation equations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       93

5 Relic gravitons                                                                            97
  5.1 Phenomenological bounds on the graviton spectrum . . . . . . . . . . . . .             98
  5.2 The graviton spectrum in minimal pre-big bang models . . . . . . . . . . .            100
  5.3 Allowed region in the ω – Ω plane . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       104
  5.4 Experimental sensitivities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    109

6 Relic dilatons                                                                          114
  6.1 Dilaton production . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 115
  6.2 Effective coupling to macroscopic matter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 119
  6.3 Bounds and allowed windows for heavy (strongly coupled) dilatons . . . . . 122
  6.4 Detection of ultra-light dilatons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 128




                                              1
7 Relic photons, axions and CMB anisotropy                                               133
  7.1 Large-scale magnetic fields and photon production . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 133
  7.2 Large-scale CMB anisotropy and axion production . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 138
  7.3 Massless axions as seeds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 144
  7.4 Massive axion spectra . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 149
  7.5 Massive axions and adiabatic perturbations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 155

8 Singularity and “graceful exit”                                                      164
  8.1 Smoothing out the singularity at low energy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 168
  8.2 Growth of the curvature and α′ corrections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 177
  8.3 Growth of the coupling and loop corrections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 181
  8.4 Graceful exit and entropy considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 188
  8.5 M-theory and brane cosmology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 192

9 Quantum string cosmology                                                              198
  9.1 The Wheeler–De Witt equation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 199
  9.2 Wave scattering in minisuperspace . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 202
  9.3 Birth of the Universe as “quantum reflection” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 206
  9.4 Birth of the Universe as “antitunnelling” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 209

10 Conclusion                                                                               211
   10.1 Towards the future: a dilaton-dominated Universe? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 211
   10.2 Other open problems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 218
   10.3 Outlook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 220

Acknowledgements                                                                          223

References                                                                                224




                                              2
1    Introduction

During the past thirty years, mainly thanks to accelerator experiments of higher and higher
energy and precision, the standard model of particle physics has established itself as the
uncontested winner in the race for a consistent description of electroweak and strong inter-
action phenomena at distances above 10−15 cm or so. There are, nonetheless, good reasons
(in particular the increasing evidence for non-vanishing neutrino masses [388, 568, 569])
to believe that the standard model is not the end of the story. The surprising validity of
this model at energies below 100 GeV, as well as the (in)famous Higgs mass fine-tuning
problem, suggest some supersymmetric extension of the standard model (for a review see
[501]) as the most likely improved description of non-gravitational phenomena over a few
more decades in the ladder of scales. It is however quite likely that other questions that are
left unanswered by the standard model, such as the peculiarities of fermionic masses and
mixings, the family pattern, C, P, CP, B violation, etc., will only find their answers at –or
around– the much higher energies at which all gauge interactions appear to unify [21]. This
energy scale appears to be embarrassingly close (on a logarithmic scale) to the so-called
Planck mass, MP ∼ 1019 GeV, the scale at which gravity becomes strong and needs to be
quantized.
    The situation with gravitational phenomena is completely different. Even the good old
Newton law is known to be valid only down to the 1 mm scale [380], so that much interest
has been devoted to the possibility of large modifications of gravity below that distance,
either from new forces mediated by light scalars such as the dilaton of string theory [577],
or from the existence of large extra dimensions felt exclusively by gravity [35, 530]. General
relativity is well tested at large scales; nevertheless; present evidence for a (small) vacuum
energy density [535, 516] suggests that, even on cosmologically large distances, the strict
Einstein theory might turn out to be inadequate. Evidently, the construction of a standard
model for gravity and cosmology lags much behind its particle physics counterpart.
    The hot big bang model (see for instance [618]), originally thought of as another great
success of general relativity, was later discovered to suffer from huge fine-tuning problems.
Some of these conceptual problems are solved by the standard inflationary paradigm (see
[441, 420] for a review), yet inflation remains a generic idea in search of a theory that
will embody it naturally. Furthermore, the classical theory of inflation does not really
address the problem of how the initial conditions needed for a successful inflation came
about. The answer to this question is certainly related to even more fundamental issues,
such as: How did it all start? What caused the big bang? Has there been a singularity at
t = 0? Unfortunately, these questions lie deeply inside the short-distance, high-curvature
regime of gravity where quantum corrections cannot be neglected. Attempts at answering
these questions using quantum cosmology based on Einstein’s theory has resulted in a lot
of heated discussions [443, 592], with no firm conclusions.
    It is very likely that both a standard model for gravity and cosmology and a full under-

                                              3
standing of the standard model of particle physics will require our understanding of physics
down to the shortest scale, the Planck length λP ∼ 10−33 cm. Until the Green–Schwarz
revolution of 1984 [346], the above conclusion would have meant postponing indefinitely
those kinds of questions. Since then, however, particle theorists have studied and devel-
oped superstring theory (see [524] for a recent review, as well as [347] for a non-specialized
introduction), which appears to represent a consistent framework not only for addressing
(and possibly answering) those questions, but even for unifying our understanding of grav-
itational and non-gravitational phenomena, and therefore for relating the two classes of
questions.
     The so-called “pre-big bang” scenario described in this report has to be seen in the above
perspective as a possible example, even just as a toy model, of what cosmology can look like
if we assume that the sought for standard model of gravity and cosmology is based on (some
particular version of) superstring theory. Although most string theorists would certainly
agree on the importance of studying the cosmological consequences of string theory, it is a
priori far from obvious that the “state of the art” in this field can provide an unambiguous
answer to this question. Indeed, most of our understanding of superstring theory is still
based on perturbative expansions, while most of the recent progress in non-perturbative
string theory has been achieved in the context of “vacua” (i.e. classical solutions to the
field equations) that respect a large number of supersymmetries [524]. By contrast, our
understanding of string theory at large curvatures and couplings, especially in the absence
of supersymmetry, is still largely incomplete. A cosmological background, and a fortiori one
that evolves rapidly in time, breaks (albeit spontaneously) supersymmetry. This is why the
Planckian regime of cosmology appears to be intractable for the time being.
    It is very fortunate, in this respect, that in the pre-big bang scenario the Universe is
supposed to emerge from a highly perturbative initial state preceding the big bang. There-
fore, early enough before (and late enough after) the big bang, we may presume to know
the effective theory to be solved. The difficult part to be dealt with non-perturbatively
remains the transition from the pre- to the post-big bang regime, through a high-curvature
(and/or possibly a large-coupling) phase. Thus, from a more phenomenological standpoint,
the relevant question becomes: Are the predictions of the pre-big bang scenario robust with
respect to the details of the non-perturbative phase?
    It is difficult of course to give a clear-cut answer to this question, but an analogy with
QCD and the physics of strong interactions may be helpful. Because of asymptotic freedom,
QCD can be treated perturbatively at short distance (high momentum transfers). However,
even “hard” processes such as e+ e− → hadrons are not fully within perturbative control.
Some soft non-perturbative physics always gets mixed in at some level, e.g. when partons
eventually turn into hadrons. The reason why certain sufficiently inclusive quantities are
believed to be calculable is that large- and short-distance physics “decouple”, so that,
for instance, the hadronization process does not affect certain “infrared-safe” quantities,
computed at the quark–gluon level.

                                              4
    In the case of string cosmology the situation should be similar, although somehow re-
versed [600]. For gravity, in fact, the large-distance, small-curvature regime is easy to deal
with, while the short-distance, high-curvature is hard. Yet, we shall argue that some con-
sequences of string cosmology, those concerning length scales that were very large with
respect to the string scale (or the horizon) in the high-curvature regime, should not be
affected (other than by a trivial kinematical redshift) by the details of the pre- to post-big
bang transition. The above reasoning does not imply, of course, that string theorists should
not address the hard, non-perturbative questions now. On the contrary, the “easy” part
of the game will provide precious information about what the relevant hard questions are,
and on how to formulate them.
    Finally, possible reservations on a “top–down” string cosmology approach may naturally
arise from a cosmology community accustomed to a data-driven, “bottom–up” approach.
We do believe ourselves that a good model of cosmology is unlikely to emerge from theo-
retical considerations alone. Input from the data will be essential in the selection among
various theoretical alternatives. We also believe, however, that a balanced combination of
theoretical and experimental imput should be the best guarantee for an eventual success.
    Insisting on the soundness of the underlying theory (e.g. on its renormalizability) was
indeed essential in the progressive construction of the standard model, just as were the
quantity and the quality of experimental data. Cosmology today resembles the particle
physics of the sixties: there is no shortage of data, and these are becoming more and more
precise but also more and more challenging while, theoretically, we are still playing with
very phenomenological (even if undoubtedly successful) models, lacking a clear connection
to other branches of fundamental physics, and therefore remaining largely unconstrained.


1.1   Coping with a beginning of time

Both the standard Friedmann–Robertson–Walker (FRW) cosmological scenario [618] and
the standard inflationary scenario [360, 420, 441] assume that time had a beginning. Many
of the problems with the former model simply stem from the fact that, at the start of the
classical era, so little time had elapsed since the beginning. Indeed, in the FRW framework,
the proper size of the (now observable) Universe was about 10−3 cm across at the start of
the classical era, say at a time of the order of a few Planck times, tP ∼ 10−43 s. This is of
course a very tiny Universe with respect to its present size (∼ 1028 cm), yet it is huge with
respect to the horizon (the distance travelled by light) at that time, λP = ctP ∼ 10−33 cm.
    In other words, a few Planck times after the big bang, our observable Universe consisted
of about (1030 )3 = 1090 Planckian-size, causally disconnected regions. Simply not enough
time had elapsed since the beginning for the Universe to become homogeneous (e.g. to
thermalize) over its entire size. Furthermore, soon after t = tP , the Universe must have
been characterized by a huge hierarchy between its Hubble radius, on the one hand, and


                                              5
its spatial-curvature radius, on the other. The relative factor of (at least) 1030 appears as
an incredible amount of fine-tuning on the initial state of the Universe, corresponding to a
huge asymmetry between space and time derivatives, or, in more abstract terms, between
intrinsic and extrinsic curvature. Was this asymmetry really there? And, if so, can it be
explained in any, more natural way?
    The conventional answer to the difficulties of the standard scenario is to wash out
inhomogeneities and spatial curvature by introducing, in the history of the Universe, a
long period of accelerated expansion, called inflation [360, 420, 441]. It has been pointed
out, however, that standard inflation cannot be “past-eternal” [94] (and cannot avoid the
initial singularity [612, 95]), so that the question of what preceded inflation is very relevant.
Insisting on the assumption that the Universe (and time itself) started at the big bang
leaves only the possibility of having post-big bang inflation mend an insufficiently smooth
and flat Universe arising from the big bang.
    Unfortunately, that solution has its own problems, for instance those of fine-tuned initial
conditions for the inflaton field and its potential. A consistent quantum cosmology approach
giving birth to a Universe in the “right” initial state is still much under debate [370, 609,
440, 633, 541]. Furthermore, the inflaton is introduced ad hoc and inflation is not part of
a grander theory of elementary particles and fundamental interactions such as superstring
theory. In spite of its possible importance, and of repeated motivated attempts [236, 461,
89], a conventional realization of an inflationary phase in a string theory context is in fact
problematic [141], in particular because the dilaton –the fundamental string theory scalar–
cannot be (at least trivially) identified with the inflaton –the fundamental scalar of the
standard inflationary scenario [125].
     Here we shall argue that, instead, superstring theory gives strong hints in favour of a
totally different approach to solving the problems of the standard cosmological scenario.
This new possibility arises if we assume that, in string theory, the big bang singularity is
fictitious and that it makes therefore sense to “continue” time to the past of the big bang
itself.


1.2   Inflation before the big bang

If the history of the Universe can be continued backward in time past the big bang, new
possibilities arise for a causal evolution to have produced a big bang with the desired char-
acteristics. The actual pre-big bang scenario presented in this report is just one possible
realization of the above general idea. Since, as we shall see, it is easy to generate a phase
of pre-big bang inflation driven by the kinetic energy of the dilaton (somewhat in analogy
with kinetic-inflation ideas [429]), we will discuss, as the simplest possibility, a minimal
cosmological scenario, which avoids making use of standard (i.e. potential-energy-driven)
post-big bang inflation.


                                               6
    This does not, though, that pre- and post-big bang inflation are mutually exclusive
or incompatible. Should near-future high-precision experiments definitely indicate that
an inflation that is exclusively of the pre-big bang type is disfavoured with respect to
conventional, post-big bang, “slow-roll” inflation, one should ask whether a pre-big bang
phase can naturally lead to “initial” conditions suitable for igniting an inflationary epoch
of the slow-roll type, rather than a standard, non-inflationary, FRW cosmology.
    One model-independent feature of pre-big bang cosmology is clear: by its very definition,
the pre-big bang phase should be an evolution towards –rather than away from– a high-
curvature regime. As we shall see in Section 2, this is precisely what the symmetries
of the string cosmology equations suggest, an unconventional realization of the inflationary
scenario, in which the phase of accelerated cosmological evolution occurs while the Universe
is approaching –rather than getting away from– the high-curvature, Planckian regime.
    The main difference between the string cosmology and the standard inflationary scenar-
ios can therefore be underlined through the opposite behaviour of the curvature scale as a
function of time, as shown in Fig. 1.1. As we go backward in time, instead of a monotonic
growth (predicted by the standard scenario), or of a “de-Sitter-like” phase of nearly con-
stant curvature (as in the conventional inflationary picture), the curvature grows, reaches
a maximum controlled by the string scale Ms = λ−1   s , and then starts decreasing towards
an asymptotically flat state, the string perturbative vacuum. The big bang singularity is
regularized by a “stringy” phase of high but finite curvature, occurring at the end of the
initial inflationary evolution.
    We should warn the reader, from the very beginning of this review, that this scenario
is far from being complete and understood in all of its aspects, and that many important
problems are to be solved still. Nevertheless, the results obtained up to now have been
encouraging, in the sense that it now seems possible to formulate models for the pre-big
bang evolution of our Universe that fit consistently in a string theory context, and which are
compatible with various phenomenological and theoretical bounds. Not only: the parameter
space of such models seems to be accessible to direct observations in a relativiely near future
and, at present, it is already indirectly constrained by various astrophysical, cosmological,
and particle physics data.
    To close this subsection we should mention, as a historical note, that the idea of a phase
of growing curvature preceding that of standard decelerated expansion, is neither new in
cosmology, nor peculiar to string theory. Indeed, if the growth of the curvature corresponds
to a contraction, it is reminiscent of Tolman’s cyclic Universe [578], in which the birth of our
present Universe is preceded by a phase of gravitational collapse (see also [225, 92, 503]).
Also, and more conventionally, the growth of the curvature may be implemented as a phase
of Kaluza–Klein superinflation [563, 1, 419], in which the accelerated expansion of our
three-dimensional space is sustained by the contraction of the internal dimensions and/or
by some exotic source, with the appropriate equation of state (in particular, strings [315]


                                               7
                                         curvature scale

                         standard inflation



                               string                  standard
                             inflation                 cosmology

                                                                   time
                          pre -big bang              post -big bang




Figure 1.1: Qualitative evolution of the curvature scale in the standard cosmological model,
in conventional inflationary models and in string-cosmology models.


and extended objects).
    In the context of general relativity, however, the problem is how to avoid the curvature
singularity appearing at the end of the phase of growing curvature. This is in general impos-
sible, for both contraction and superinflationary expansion, unless one accepts rather drastic
modifications of the classical gravitational theory. In the contracting case, for instance, the
damping of the curvature and a smooth transition to the phase of decreasing curvature can
be arranged through the introduction of a non-minimal and gauge-non-invariant coupling of
gravity to a cosmic vector [504] or scalar [555, 56] field, with a (phenomenological) modifi-
cation of the equation of state in the Planckian curvature regime [540, 621], or with the use
of a non-metric, Weyl-integrable connection [503]. In the case of superinflation, a smooth
transition can be arranged through a breaking of the local Lorentz symmetry of general
relativity [266, 281], a geometric contribution of the spin of the fermionic sources [267], or
the embedding of the space-time geometry into a more fundamental quantum phase-space
dynamics [136, 269]. In the more exotic context of topological transitions, a smooth evolu-
tion from contraction to expansion, through a state of minimal size, is also obtained with
the adiabatic compression and the dimensional transmutation of the de Sitter vacuum [316].
    In the context of string theory, on the contrary, the growth of the curvature is naturally
associated to the growth of the dilaton and of the coupling constants (see for instance
Section 2). This effect, on the one hand, sustains the phase of superinflationary expansion,
with no need of matter sources or extra dimensions. On the other hand, it necessarily leads
the Universe to a regime in which not only the curvature but also the couplings become
strong, so that typical “stringy” effects become important and are expected to smooth out
the curvature singularity. This means that there is no need to look for more or less ad hoc
modifications of the theory, as string theory itself is expected to provide the appropriate
tools for a complete and self-consistent cosmological scenario.




                                                 8
1.3     Pre-big bang inflation and conformal frames

While postponing to the next section the issue of physical motivations, it is important
to classify the various inflationary possibilities just from their kinematical properties. To
be more precise, let us consider the so-called flatness problem (the arguments are similar,
and the conclusions the same, for the horizon problem mentioned in Subsection 1.1). We
shall assume, on the basis of the approximate isotropy observed at large scale, that our
present cosmological phase can be correctly described by the ordinary Einstein–Friedmann
equations. In that case, the gravitational part of the equations contains two contributions
from the metric: k/a2 , coming from the spatial (or intrinsic) curvature, and H 2 , coming
from the gravitational kinetic energy (or extrinsic curvature). Present observations imply
that the spatial curvature term, if not negligible, is at least non-dominant, i.e.
                                               k
                                       r2 =         < 1.                                (1.1)
                                              a2 H 2 ∼
   On the other hand, during a phase of standard, decelerated expansion, the ratio r grows
with time. Indeed, if a ∼ tβ ,
                                   r ∼ ȧ−1 ∼ t1−β ,                                  (1.2)
so that r is growing both in the matter-dominated (β = 2/3) and in the radiation-dominated
(β = 1/2) era. Thus, as we go back in time, r becomes smaller and smaller. If, for instance,
we wish to impose initial conditions at the Planck scale, we must require a fine-tuning
suppressing by 30 orders of magnitude the spatial curvature term with respect to the other
terms of the cosmological equations. Even if initial conditions are given at a lower scale
(say the GUT scale) the amount of fine-tuning is still nearly as bad.
    This problem can be solved by introducing an early phase during which the value of
r, initially of order 1, decreases so much in time that its subsequent growth during FRW
evolution keeps it still below 1 today. It is evident that, on pure kinematic grounds, this
requirement can be implemented in two classes of backgrounds.

 (I) : a ∼ tβ , β > 1, t → +∞. This class of background corresponds to what is conven-
     tionally called “power inflation” [447], describing accelerated expansion and decreasing
     curvature scale, ȧ > 0, ä > 0, Ḣ < 0. It contains, as the limiting case (β → ∞),
     exponential de Sitter inflation, a ∼ eHt , Ḣ = 0, describing accelerated expansion with
     constant curvature.

(II) : a ∼ (−t)β , β < 1, t → 0− . This case contains two subclasses.

      (IIa) : β < 0, corresponding to “superinflation” or “pole inflation” [563, 1, 419], and
            describing accelerated expansion with growing curvature scale, ȧ > 0, ä > 0,
            Ḣ > 0;
      (IIb) : 0 < β < 1, describing accelerated contraction and growing curvature scale
            [320], ȧ < 0, ä < 0, Ḣ < 0.

                                                9
In the first class of backgrounds, corresponding to post-big bang inflation, the Universe is
driven away from the singularity/high-curvature regime, while in the second class inflation
drives the Universe towards it, with the typical pre-big bang behaviour illustrated in Fig. 1.1.
We may thus immediately note a very important “phenomenological” difference between
post- and pre-big bang inflation. In the former case the Planck era lies very far in the past,
and its physics remains screened from present observations, since the scales that probed
Planckian physics are still far from re-entering. By contrast, in the pre-big bang case, the
Planck/string regimes are closer to us (assuming that no or little inflation occurs after the
big bang itself). Scales that probe Planckian physics are now the first to re-enter, and to
leave an imprint for our observations (see, for instance, the case of a stochastic background
of relic gravitational waves, discussed in Section 5).
    The inflationary character of Class IIa backgrounds is well known, and recognized since
the earlier studies of the inflationary scenario [447]. The inflationary character of Class IIb
is more unconventional –a sort of “inflation without inflation” [273], if we insist on looking
at inflation as accelerated expansion– and was first pointed out only much later [320]. It is
amusing to observe that, in the pre-big bang scenario, both subclasses IIa and IIb occur.
However, as discussed in detail in Subsection 2.5, they do not correspond to different models
of pre-big bang inflation, but simply to different kinematical representations of the same
scenario in two different conformal frames.
   In order to illustrate this point, which is important also for our subsequent arguments, we
                                                                                            e
shall proceed in two steps. First we will show that, through a field redefinition g = g(ge, φ),
       e
φ = φ(φ), it is always possible to move from the string frame (S-frame), in which the lowest
order gravidilaton effective action takes the form
                                     Z          q
                      S(g, φ) = −        dd+1 x |g| e−φ [R + gµν ∂µ φ∂ν φ] ,               (1.3)

to the Einstein frame (E-frame), in which the dilaton φ is minimally coupled to the metric
and has a canonical kinetic term:
                                   Z       q                     
                             e        d+1          e  1 µν e e
                       S(g , φ) = − d x |g | R − g ∂µ φ∂ν φ
                         e                   e          e                            (1.4)
                                                      2
(see Subsection 1.4 for notations and conventions). Secondly, we will show that, by ap-
plying such a redefinition, a superinflationary solution obtained in the S-frame becomes an
accelerated contraction in the E-frame, and vice versa.
   We shall consider, for simplicity, an isotropic, spatially flat background with d spatial
dimensions, and set:                            
                         gµν = diag N 2 , −a2 δij ,      φ = φ(t),                     (1.5)
where g00 = N 2 is to be fixed by an arbitrary gauge choice. For this background the S-frame
action (1.3) becomes, modulo a total derivative,
                                Z
                                             ad e−φ h 2                       i
                  S(g, φ) = −       dd+1 x           φ̇ − 2dH φ̇ + d(d − 1)H 2 ,           (1.6)
                                               N

                                                    10
where, as expected, N has no kinetic term and plays the role of a Lagrange multiplier. In
                              e, e
the E-frame the variables are N     e and the action(1.4), after integration by parts, takes
                                 a, φ,
the canonical form
                                       Z                                          
                            e =−                    ed
                                                    a  1 2
                      S(ge, φ)             dd+1 x     − φė + d(d − 1)H 2 .                            (1.7)
                                                    e
                                                    N  2
A quick comparison with Eq. (1.6) finally leads to the field redefinition (not a coordinate
transformation!) connecting the Einstein and String frames:
                                                                                   s
                                                                                        2
               e = ae−φ/(d−1) ,
               a                           e = N e−φ/(d−1) ,
                                           N                                 φe = φ        .           (1.8)
                                                                                       d−1

    Consider now an isotropic, d-dimensional vacuum solution of the action (1.6), describing
a superinflationary, pre-big bang expansion driven by the dilaton (see Section 2) [489, 599],
of Class IIa, with ȧ > 0, ä > 0, Ḣ > 0, φ̇ > 0:
                       √                                √
           a = (−t)−1/ d ,         eφ = (−t)−( d+1) ,                    t < 0,            t → 0− ,    (1.9)

and look for the corresponding E-frame solution. Since the above solution is valid in the
synchronous gauge, N = 1, we can choose, for instance, the synchronous gauge also in the
                 e by the condition:
E-frame, and fix N
                                  e dt ≡ N e−φ/(d−1) dt = dt,
                                  N                        e                                          (1.10)

which defines the E-frame cosmic time e
                                      t as:

                                           dte = e−φ/(d−1) dt.                                        (1.11)

After integration
                                                          d−1
                                                           √
                                              t ∼ ted+ d ;                                            (1.12)
the transformed solution takes the form:
                                                    q
                                                         2(d−1)
                                   e           −
            a     e 1/d ,
            e = (−t)              eφ = (−t)
                                         e                  d
                                                                  ,      te < 0,          te → 0− .   (1.13)

It can easily be checked that this solution describes accelerated contraction of Class IIb,
with growing dilaton and growing curvature scale:

                     da
                      e                d2 a
                                          e                  dHe               dφe
                         < 0,               < 0,                  < 0,             > 0.               (1.14)
                     dte               dte2                   dte              dte
The same result applies if we transform other isotropic solutions from the String to the
Einstein frame, for instance the superinflationary solutions with perfect fluid sources [320],
presented in Section 2.
   To conclude this section, and for later use, let us stress that the main dynamical differ-
ence between post-big bang inflation, Class I metrics, and pre-big bang inflation, Class II

                                                     11
metrics, can also be conveniently illustrated in terms of the proper size of the event horizon,
relative to a given comoving observer.
    Consider in fact the proper distance de (t) of the event horizon from a comoving observer,
at rest in an isotropic, conformally flat background [536]:
                                                        Z tM
                                    de (t) = a(t)              dt′ a−1 (t′ ).           (1.15)
                                                         t

Here tM is the maximal allowed extension, towards the future, of the cosmic time coordinate
for the given background manifold. The above integral converges for all the above classes
of accelerated (expanding or contracting) scale factors. In the case of Class I metrics we
have, in particular,
                                        Z ∞
                                    β                         t     β
                       de (t) = t             dt′ t′−β =         =     H −1 (t)         (1.16)
                                         t                   β−1   β−1

for power-law inflation (β > 1, t > 0), and
                                                   Z ∞
                                                                    ′
                               de (t) = eHt              dt′ e−Ht = H −1                (1.17)
                                                    t

for de Sitter inflation. For Class II metrics (β < 1, t < 0) we have instead
                                        Z 0
                                                                (−t)    β
                   de (t) = (−t)β             dt′ (−t′ )−β =         =     H −1 (t).    (1.18)
                                         t                      1−β    β−1

In all cases the proper size de (t) evolves in time like the so-called Hubble horizon (i.e. the
inverse of the modulus of the Hubble parameter), and then like the inverse of the curvature
scale. The size of the horizon is thus constant or growing in standard inflation (Class I),
decreasing in pre-big bang inflation (Class II), both in the S-frame and in the E-frame.
    Such an important difference is clearly illustrated in Figs. 1.2 and 1.3, where the dashed
lines represent the evolution of the horizon and the solid curves the evolution of the scale
factor. The shaded area at time t0 represents the portion of Universe inside our present
Hubble radius. As we go back in time, according to the standard scenario, the horizon
shrinks linearly (H −1 ∼ t); however, the decrease of the scale factor is slower, so that, at
the beginning of the phase of standard evolution (t = t1 ), we end up with a causal horizon
much smaller than the portion of Universe that we presently observe. This is the “horizon
problem” already mentioned at the beginning of this section.
    In Fig. 1.2 the phase of standard evolution is preceded in time by a phase of standard,
post-big bang (in particular de Sitter) inflation. Going back in time, for t < t1 , the scale
factor keeps shrinking, and our portion of Universe “re-enters” the Hubble radius during a
phase of constant (or slightly growing in time) horizon.
    In Fig. 1.3 the standard evolution is preceded in time by a phase of pre-big bang
inflation, with growing curvature. The Universe “re-enters” the Hubble radius during a

                                                        12
                                                             a




Figure 1.2: Qualitative evolution of the Hubble horizon (dashed curve) and of the scale
factor (solid curve) in the standard, post-big bang inflationary scenario.


phase of shrinking horizon. To emphasize the difference, we have plotted the evolution of
the scale factor both as expanding in the S-frame, a(t), and as contracting in the E-frame,
a
e(t). Unlike in post-big bang inflation, the proper size of the initial portion of the Universe
may be very large in strings (or Planck) units, but not larger than the initial horizon itself
[286], as emphasized in the picture, and as will be discussed in a more quantitative way in
Section 2.4. The initial horizon Hi−1 is large because the initial curvature scale is small (in
string cosmology, in particular, Hi ≪ 1/λs ).
    This is a basic consequence of the choice of the initial state; in the context of the string
cosmology scenario, this approaches the flat, cold and empty string perturbative vacuum,
(see the discussion of Section 3). This initial state has to be contrasted with the extremely
curved, hot and dense initial state of the standard scenario, characterizing a Universe that
starts inflating at (or soon after) the Planck scale, Hi ∼ 1/λP (see also [288] for a more
detailed comparison and discussion of pre-big bang versus post-big bang inflation).


1.4   Outline, notations and conventions

We give here a general overlook at the material presented in the various sections of this
report. Furthermore, each section will begin with an outline of the content of each of its
subsections, and will try to be as self-contained as possible, in order to help the reader
interested only in some particular aspects of this field.
   In Section 2, after a very quick reminder of some relevant properties of superstring
theory, we review the string-theoretic motivations behind the pre-big bang scenario, and


                                              13
                                                           a




                                                            ã
                                                    a




Figure 1.3: Qualitative evolution of the Hubble horizon (dashed curve) and of the scale
factor (solid curve) in the pre-big bang inflationary scenario, in the S-frame, a(t), and in
the E-frame, ae(t).


outline the main ideas. In Section 3, after formulating on the basis of the previous discussion
a postulate of “ asymptotic past triviality”, we discuss, within that framework, the problem
of initial conditions and fine-tuning.
    As a preliminary to the discussion of the observational consequences of the pre-big bang
scenario, Section 4 presents some general results on the evolution of quantum fluctuations.
Section 5 will deal with the specific case of tensor (metric) perturbations and Section 6 with
scalar (dilatonic) ones, while Section 7 will consider gauge (in particular electromagnetic)
and axionic perturbations, and their possible physical relevance to galactic magnetic fields
and large scale structure, respectively.
    The last part of this report is devoted to various open problems, in particular to the
possibility of a smooth transition from the pre- to the post-big bang regime, the so-called
“exit problem” (Section 8). Several lines of approach to (and partial solutions of) this
problem are presented, including a discussion of heat and entropy production in pre-big bang
cosmology. A possible minisuperspace approach to the quantum regime will be illustrated
in Section 9. Finally, Section 10 contains the discussion of a possible dilatonic interpretation
of the quintessence, a short presentation of other open problems, and an outlook.
    For further study of string cosmology and of the pre-big bang scenario, we also refer the
interested reader to other review papers [437, 288, 63, 244, 102], as well as to two recent
introductory lectures [289, 605]. A regularly updated collection of selected papers on the
pre-big bang scenario is also available at [265].
   We finally report here our conventions for the metric and the curvature tensor, together


                                              14
with the definitions of some variables frequently used in the paper.
    We shall always use natural units h̄ = c = kB = 1. Unless otherwise stated, the metric
signature is fixed by g00 > 0; the Riemann and Ricci tensors are defined by

               Rµνα β = ∂µ Γνα β + Γµρ β Γνα ρ − (µ ↔ ν),                             Rνα = Rµνα µ .       (1.19)

In particular, for a Bianchi-I-type metric, and in the synchronous gauge,
                                                                                 
                                      gµν = diag 1, −a2i (t)δij ,                                          (1.20)

our conventions lead to
                               X                                                              X
                  R0 0 = −           Ḣi + Hi2 ,                     Ri j = −Ḣi δij − Hi δij       Hk ,
                               i                                                                k
                                                                         !2
                          X                            X
                  R=−              2Ḣi + Hi2       −               Hi        ,                            (1.21)
                           i                                i

where Hi = d ln ai /dt. In a D = d + 1 space-time manifold, Greek indices run from 0 to d,
while Latin indices run from 1 to d.
   The duality invariant dilatonic variable, the “shifted dilaton” φ, is referred to a d-
                                               R    p
dimensional spatial section of finite volume, ( dd x |g|)t=const < ∞, and is defined by
                                                    Z
                                         −φ             dd x q
                                        e     =               |gd |e−φ .                                   (1.22)
                                                        λds
In a Bianchi-I-type metric background, in particular, we shall absorb into φ the con-
                     R d
stant shift − ln(λ−d
                  s   d x) (required to secure the scalar behaviour of φ under coordinate
reparametrizations), and we shall set
                                                            X
                                            φ =φ−                    ln ai .                               (1.23)
                                                                i

   Finally, λs is the fundamental length scale of string theory, related to the string mass
Ms and to the string tension T (the mass per unit length) by

                                        λ2s = Ms−2 T −1 ≡ 2πα′ .                                           (1.24)

At the tree level (i.e. at lowest order) in the string coupling gs , the string length is related
to the Planck length λP , and to the gravitational constant GD in d + 1 dimensions, by

                                       8πGD = λd−1
                                               P   = λd−1
                                                      s   eφ .                                             (1.25)

In d = 3, in particular, the relation between the string and the Planck mass MP = λ−1
                                                                                    P
reads
                                (λP /λs )2 = (Ms /MP )2 = eφ .                  (1.26)
We shall often work in units such that 2λd−1 s    = 1, i.e. 16πGD = 1, in which exp(φ)
parametrizes, in the String frame, the (dimensionless) strength of the gravitational coupling.

                                                         15
2    String theory motivations

A very important concept in string theory, as well as in field theory, is that of moduli
space, the space of vacua. In field theory, and in the absence of gravity, the coordinates
of moduli space label the possible ground states of the theory. It is very important to
immediately distinguish classical moduli space from its exact, quantum counterpart. The
two are generally different, since a classical-level ground state can fail to be a true ground
state when perturbative or non-perturbative quantum corrections are added (consider for
instance dynamical symmetry breaking à la Coleman–Weinberg, or the double-well potential
in quantum mechanics).
     When gravity is added to the picture (and this is always the case in s tring theory) the
concept of a lowest-energy state becomes less well defined, since total energy is always zero in
a general-covariant theory. It is therefore better, in string theory, to extend the definition of
moduli space to include all string backgrounds that allow a consistent string propagation, i.e.
those consistent with world-sheet conformal invariance [346]. Such backgrounds correspond
to the vanishing of the two-dimensional σ-model β-functions [445] and, at the same time,
they can also be shown to satisfy the field equations of an effective action living in ordinary
space-time. The most famous example of a consistent background is, for superstrings,
D = 10 Minkowski space-time with trivial (i.e. constant) dilaton and antisymmetric tensor
potentials. Unfortunately, even if quantum (i.e. string-loop) corrections are neglected,
our knowledge of moduli space is very limited. Basically, apart from a handful of exact
conformal field theories, such as the Wess–Zumino–Witten models, only low-energy solutions
(i.e. classical solutions of the effective low-energy field theory) are known.
    The known solutions are, at the same time, too many and too few. They are too many
because they typically leave the vacuum expectation values of a few scalar fields completely
undetermined. Such fields correspond to gravitationally coupled massless scalar particles
that mediate dangerous long-range forces, badly violating the well-tested equivalence prin-
ciple. The way out of this problem is clear: these flat directions should be lifted by quantum
corrections, typically (in the supersymmetric case) at the non-perturbative level. The known
solutions are also too few, because some of them, which we would like to see appearing, are
missing: notably those describing gravitational collapse or cosmological backgrounds, which
evolve as a function of time from a regime of low curvature and/or coupling to one of high
curvature and/or coupling (and vice versa). These solutions are very hard to analyse for
two reasons: first, because time evolution spontaneously breaks supersymmetry, rendering
the solutions unstable to radiative corrections; secondly, because the solutions go out of
theoretical control, as they enter the non-perturbative regime.
    For the purpose of this section, the important property of superstring’s moduli space is
that it exhibits duality symmetries. Generically, this means that points in moduli space that
seem to describe different theories actually describe the same theory (up to some irrelevant
relabelling of the fields). Let us illustrate this in the simplest example of T -duality (for a

                                               16
review see, for instance, [340]).
    Consider a theory of closed strings moving in a space endowed with some compact
dimensions, say, for the sake of simplicity, with one extra dimension having the topology of
a circle. Let us denote by Rc the radius of this circle. In point-particle theory, momentum
along the compact dimension is quantized, in units of h̄/Rc . This is also true in string
theory, as far as the motion of the string’s centre of mass (a non-oscillatory “zero mode”)
is concerned. However, for closed strings moving on a compact space, like our circle, there
is a second zero mode: the string can simply wind around the circle an integer number of
times. By doing so it acquires winding energy, which is quantized in units of (2πT )Rc , if
T = (2πα′ )−1 is the string tension.
    Something remarkable does happen if we replace Rc by R     fc ≡ h̄/T Rc ≡ λ2 /Rc . A point
                                                                                 s
particle would certainly notice the difference between Rc and R    fc (unless Rc = R  fc = λs ),
since the new momenta will be different from the old ones. A closed string, instead, does not
feel the change of R since the role of the momenta in the original theory will mow be played
by the winding modes, and vice versa. This symmetry of closed string theory has been
called T -duality and is believed to be exact, at least to all orders of perturbation theory,
provided a suitable transformation of the dilaton accompanies the one on the radius (it also
has interesting extensions to discrete groups of the O(d, d; Z) type [340]). It is important
to stress, in our context, that T -duality actually implies that there is a physical lower limit
to the dimensions of a compact space, controlled by the string length λs itself.
    When applied to open strings, T -duality leads to the concept of Dirichlet strings, or
D-strings. In other words, while closed strings are self-dual, open strings with Neumann
boundary conditions are dual to open strings with Dirichlet boundary conditions, and vice
versa. These developments [523] have led to the study of D-branes, the manifolds on which
the end-points of open D-strings are confined; they play a major role in establishing the
basic unity of all five known types of 10-dimensional superstring theories (Type I, Type
IIA, Type IIB, HETSO(32), HETE8) as different limits of a single, more fundamental “M-
theory” [626].
    In order to briefly illustrate this point we start recalling that all superstring theories are
actually defined through a double perturbative expansion in two dimensionless parameters:
the first, the string coupling expansion, can be seen as the analogue of the loop expansion
in quantum field theory, except that the coupling constant gets promoted to a scalar field,
the dilaton. Consequently, the range of validity of the loop expansion depends on the
value of the dilaton, and can break down in certain regions of space-time if the dilaton is
not constant. The second expansion, which has no quantum field theory analogue, is an
expansion in derivatives, the dimensionless parameter being λ2s ∂ 2 , with λs the fundamental
length scale of string theory (see Subsection 2.1). Obviously, the validity of this second
expansion breaks down when curvature or field space-time derivatives become of order 1 in
string-length units.


                                               17
    One of the most amazing recent developments in string theory [626] is the recognition
that the above five theories, rather than forming isolated islands in moduli space, are con-
nected to one another via a web of duality transformations. In the huge moduli space, they
represent “corners” where the above-mentioned perturbative expansions are, qualitatively
at least, correct. A sixth corner actually should be added, corresponding to 11-dimensional
supergravity [579]. The mysterious theory approaching these six known theories in appro-
priate limits was given the name of M-theory. It might seem curious, at first sight, that one
is able to flow continuously from 10 to 11 dimensions, within a single theory. The puzzle
was solved after it was realized that the D = 11 supergravity theory has no dilaton, hence
no free coupling. In other words, the dilaton of the five 10-dimensional superstring theories
becomes (at large coupling) an extra dimension of space [626, 376]. At weak coupling, this
extra dimension is so small that one may safely describe physics in 10 dimensions.
    In spite of the beauty of all this, the previous discussion shows that the moduli-space
diagram connecting the five superstring theories can be quite misleading. Since each point
in the diagram is supposed to represent a possible solution of the β-function constraints,
and the diagram itself is supposed to show how apparently different theories are actually
connected by moving in coupling constant (or other moduli-) space, it necessarily includes
the flat directions we have been arguing against. At the same time, cosmological solutions of
the above-mentioned type, i.e. evolving in different regions of coupling constant/curvature,
cannot be “localized” in the diagram. A single cosmology, for instance, may indeed corre-
spond to an initial Universe, well described by heterotic string theory, ending in another
Universe better described by perturbative Type I theory. Yet, such a cosmological solution
should be only a point, not a curve, in moduli space. As we shall argue below, thanks
to some gravitational instability, solutions of the above type are rather the rule than the
exception.
    It seems appropriate, at this point, to comment on the fact that modern research in
string/M-theory looks to be strongly biased towards analysing supersymmetric vacua, or at
least solutions that preserve a large number of supersymmetries [524]. While the mathemat-
ical motivation for that is quite obvious, and physically interesting results can be rigorously
derived in special cases (concerning, for instance, BPS states and black holes), it is quite
clear that cosmology, especially inflationary or rapidly evolving solutions, requires extensive
breaking of supersymmetries. Given their phenomenological importance, we think that more
effort should be devoted to developing new techniques dealing with non-supersymmetric so-
lutions and, in particular, with their high-curvature and/or large-coupling regimes.
    In this section we will emphasize the role of the duality symmetry for the pre-big bang
scenario, starting from the short- and large-distance properties of string theory (Subsection
2.1), and from the related invariance of the classical cosmological equations under a large
group of non-compact transformations (Subsections 2.2, 2.3). We will discuss the inflation-
ary aspects of families of solutions related by such groups of transformations in Subsection
2.4, and will end up with a discussion of the relative merits of the so-called Einstein and

                                              18
String frames (in Subsection 2.5), in spite of their ultimate equivalence.


2.1   Short- and large-distance motivations

Since the classical (Nambu–Goto) action S of a string is proportional to the area A of the
space-time surface it sweeps, its quantization requires the introduction of a fundamental
“quantum” of length λs , through the rlation:

                                         S/h̄ = A/λ2s .                                    (2.1)

As discussed in [597, 598], the appearance of this length in string theory is so much tied to
quantum mechanics that, after introducing λs , we are actually dispensed from introducing
h̄ itself, provided we use the natural units of energy of string theory, i.e. provided we replace
E by α′ E, the classical length of a string of energy E. For instance, the Regge trajectory
relation between angular momentum and mass, J = α′ M 2 + α(0)h̄ (c = 1 throughout), is
rewritten in string units as J = M 2 + α(0)λ2s , where h̄ has neatly disappeared.
    One of the most celebrated virtues of string theory is its soft behaviour at short distances.
This property, which is deeply related to the extended nature of fundamental particles in
the theory, makes gravity and gauge interactions not just renormalizable, but finite, at least
order by order in the loop expansion [524]. At the same time, the presence of an effective
short-distance cut-off in loop diagrams should have a counterpart in a modification of the
theory, when the external momenta of the diagram approach the cut-off itself.
     An analogy with the standard electroweak theory may be of order here: the Glashow–
Weinberg–Salam model makes Fermi’s model softer at short distances, turning a non-
renormalizable effective theory into a fully-fledged renormalizable gauge theory. At the same
time, the naive predictions of Fermi’s model of electroweak interactions become largely mod-
                                                                                         −1/2
ified when the W/Z-mass region is approached. Note that this mass scale, and not GF ,
is where new physics comes into play.
    In string theory, something similar is expected to occur, this time in the gravitational
sector, where Einstein’s effective theory should be recovered at low energy, as soon as the
                        −1/2
string scale (and not GN ∼ MP ) is reached. At present, there are not so many available
tests of this idea: one comes from the study of trans-Planckian energy collisions in string
theory [22, 23]. When one prepares the initial state in such a way as to expect the formation
of tiny black holes, having radius (or curvature) respectively smaller (or larger) than the
fundamental scale of string theory, one finds that such objects are simply not formed.
Arguments based on entropy considerations [98] also suggest that the late stage of black
hole evaporation ends, in string theory, into a normal non-collapsed string state of radius
equal to the string length, rather than into a singularity. Finally, we recall the arguments
from T -duality for a minimal compactification scale, given at the beginning of this section.
   This considerable amount of circumstantial evidence leads to the conclusion that λs

                                               19
plays, in string theory, the role of a minimal observable length, i.e. of an ultraviolet cut-
off. Physical quantities are expected to be bounded (in natural units) by the appropriate
powers of λs , e.g. the curvature scale R ∼ H 2 ∼ Gρ ≤ λ−2   s , the temperature T ≤ λs ,
                                                                                          −1

the compactification radius Rc ≥ λs , and so on. It follows, in particular, that space-time
singularities are expected to be avoided (or at least reinterpreted) in any geometric model
of gravity which is compatible with string theory.
    In other words, in quantum string theory, relativistic quantum mechanics should solve
the singularity problems in much the same way as non-relativistic quantum mechanics solves
the singularity problem of the hydrogen atom, by keeping the electron and the proton a
finite distance apart. By the same token, string theory gives us a rationale for asking
daring questions such as: What was there before the big bang? Even if we do not know
the answer to this question in string theory, in no other currently available framework can
such a question be meaningfully asked.
    To answer it, we should keep in mind, however, that even at large distance (i.e. low
energy, small curvatures), superstring theory does not automatically give Einstein’s general
relativity. Rather, it leads to a scalar–tensor theory (which in some limit reduces to a theory
of the Jordan–Brans–Dicke variety). In fact, the conformal invariance of string theory (see
for instance [346]) unavoidably requires a new scalar particle/field φ, the dilaton, which, as
already mentioned, gets reinterpreted as the radius of a new dimension of space in M-theory
[626, 376].
    By supersymmetry, the dilaton is massless to all orders in perturbation theory (i.e. as
long as supersymmetry remains unbroken) andcan thus give rise to dangerous violations of
the equivalence principle. This is just one example of the general problem with classical
moduli space that we mentioned at the beginning of this section. Furthermore, φ controls
the strength of all forces [624], gravitational and gauge alike, by fixing the grand-unification
coupling through the (tree-level) relation [403]:

                                αGUT ≃ (λP /λs )2 ≃ exp(φ) ,                               (2.2)

showing the basic unification of all forces in string theory and the fact that, in our conven-
tions, the weak-coupling region coincides with φ ≪ −1.
    The bottom line is that, in order not to contradict precision tests of the equivalence prin-
ciple and of the constancy (today and in the “recent” past) of the gauge and gravitational
couplings, we require [577] the dilaton to have a mass and to be frozen at the bottom of its
own potential today (see, however, [197, 198] for an ingenious alternative, whose possible
consequences will be discussed in Sections. 6 and 10). This does not exclude, however, the
possibility of the dilaton having evolved cosmologically in the past (after all, the metric
did!), within the weak coupling region (φ → −∞) where it was practically massless. The
amazing (yet simple) observation [599] is that, by so doing, the dilaton may have inflated
the Universe.


                                              20
   A simplified argument, which, although not completely accurate, captures the essential
physical point, consists in writing the Friedmann equation 3H 2 = 8πGρ, and in noticing
that a growing dilaton (meaning through Eq. (2.2) a growing G) can drive the growth
of H even if the energy density of standard matter decreases (as typically expected in an
expanding Universe). This particular type of superinflation, characterized by growing H
and φ, has been termed dilaton-driven inflation.
    The basic idea of pre-big bang cosmology [599, 319, 320, 321] can then be illustrated
as in Fig. 2.1, where the dilaton starts at very large negative values, rolling up a potential
which, at the beginning, is practically zero (at weak coupling, the potential is known to be
instantonically suppressed [89], V (φ) ∼ exp[− exp(−φ)]). The dilaton grows and inflates the
Universe, until the potential develops some non-perturbative structure, which can eventually
damp and trap the dilaton (possibly after some oscillations). The whole process may be
seen as the slow, but eventually explosive, decay of the string perturbative vacuum (the
flat and interaction-free asymptotic initial state of the pre-big bang scenario), into a final,
radiation-dominated state typical of standard cosmology. Incidentally, as shown in Fig.
2.1, the dilaton of string theory can easily roll-up –rather than down– potential hills, as a
consequence of its non-standard coupling to gravity.
    A phase of accelerated evolution, sustained by the kinetic energy of a growing dilaton
[599] (and possibly by other antisymmetric tensor fields [308, 177], in more complicated
backgrounds) is not just possible: it does necessarily occur in a class of (lowest-order)
cosmological solutions based on a cosmological variant of the (previously mentioned) T -
duality symmetry [599, 580, 477, 478, 560, 367, 581, 582, 318]. In such a way duality
provides a strong motivation for (and becomes a basic ingredient of) the pre-big bang
scenario first introduced in [599] and whose developments are the subject of this report.
    The importance of duality for a string-motivated cosmology was indeed pointed out
already in some pioneer papers [18, 428, 20, 109] based on superstring thermodynamics;
the fact that our standard Universe could emerge after a phase of inflation with “dual”
cosmological properties was also independently suggested by the study of string motion
in curved backgrounds [315]. For future applications (see Section 8) we wish to recall
here, in particular, the T -duality approach to a superstring Universe discussed in [109]
(see also [378]), in which all nine spatial dimensions are compact (with similar radius),
and the presence of winding strings wrapped around the tori prevents the expansion of the
primordial Universe, unless such winding modes disappear by mutual annihilation.
    The probability of annihilation, however, depends on the number of dimensions. In
d = 9 it is so small that strings prevent the nine dimensions from expanding. If n < 6
dimensions contract to the string size, string annihilation in the other 9 − n is still so
small that even they cannot expand. Only for n ≥ 6 is the annihilation probability in the
remaining dimensions large enough, and the expansion becomes possible: this would give
3 as the maximal number of large space dimensions (such a mechanism has recently been


                                              21
                                              V( )


                     weak coupling                               strong coupling




                     initial                       present   ?



Figure 2.1: According to the pre-big bang scenario, the dilaton starts in the asymptotic past
of our Universe at very large negative values, and grows through a flat potential towards
the strong-coupling regime. At present, it is either trapped at a minimum of the potential,
or keeps growing monotonically towards +∞ (see Section 10).


extended also to a more general brane–gas context, see Subsection 8.5).
    This as well as the other, early attempts were based on Einstein’s cosmological equations,
i.e. on gravitational equations at fixed dilaton. Taking into account the large-distance
modifications of general relativity required by string theory, and including a dynamical
dilaton, the target-space duality typical of closed strings moving in compact spaces can be
extended (in a somewhat modified version) even to non-compact cosmological backgrounds
[599, 478, 580, 581, 582]. Consider in fact a generic solution of the field equations of string
theory (hence a point in our moduli space), which possesses a certain number n of Abelian
isometries (the generalization to non-Abelian isometries is subtle, see [206]). Working in an
adapted coordinate system, in which the fields appearing in the solution are independent
of n-coordinates, it can then be argued [477] that there is an O(n, n; R) group that, acting
on the solution, generates new ones (in other words, this group has a representation in that
part of moduli space that possesses the said isometries).
    Note that, unlike strict T -duality, this continuous O(d, d; R) extension is not a true
symmetry of the theory, but only a symmetry of the classical field equations. The corre-
sponding transformations can be used to generate, from a given solution, other, generally
inequivalent ones, and this is possible even in the absence of compactification. In the next
subsections we will show in detail that such transformations, applied to a decelerated cos-
mological solution (and combined with a time-reversal transformation) lead in general to
inflation, and we shall present various (low-energy) exact inflationary solutions, with and
without sources, which may represent possible models of pre-big bang evolution. We shall
consider, in particular, both scale-factor [599, 580, 582] and O(d, d) [477, 478, 560, 367, 318]
duality tranformations, and we will discuss some peculiar kinematic aspects of such pre-big


                                              22
bang solutions.


2.2   Scale-factor duality without and with sources

We start by recalling that, in general relativity, the Einstein action is invariant under time
reflections. It follows that, if we consider an isotropic, spatially flat metric parametrized by
the scale factor a(t),
                                      ds2 = dt2 − a2 (t)dx2i ,                              (2.3)
and if a(t) is a solution of the Einstein equations, then a(−t) is also a solution. On the
other hand, when t → −t the Hubble parameter flips sign;

                            a(t) → a(−t),             H = ȧ/a → −H.                       (2.4)

Thus, to any standard cosmological solution H(t), describing decelerated expansion and
decreasing curvature (H > 0, Ḣ < 0), time reversal associates a “reflected” solution,
H(−t), describing a contracting Universe.
    In string theory, the reparametrization and gauge invariance of conventional field theo-
ries are expected to be only a tiny subset of a much larger symmetry group, which should
characterize the effective action even at lowest order. The string effective action that we
shall use in this section, in particular, is determined by the usual requirement that the
string motion is conformally invariant at the quantum level [346]. The starting point is the
(non-linear) sigma model describing the coupling of a closed string to external metric (gµν ),
scalar (φ), and antisymmetric tensor (Bµν ) fields. In the bosonic sector the action reads:
                Z                                                                         
        1           2       √   ij   µ      ν        ij   µ   ν          α′ √
   S=−            d ξ     −γγ ∂i x ∂j x gµν (x) + ǫ ∂i x ∂j x Bµν (x) +       −γR(2) φ(x) .
       4πα′                                                              2
                                                                                         (2.5)
          ′     2               i       i
Here 2πα = λs , ∂i ≡ ∂/∂ξ , and ξ are the coordinates spanning the two-dimensional
string world-sheet (i, j = 1, 2), whose induced metric is γik (ξ). The coordinates xµ = xµ (ξ)
are the fields determining the embedding of the string world-sheet in the external (also
called “target”) space, ǫij is the two-dimensional Levi-Civita tensor density, and R(2) (γ)
is the scalar curvature for the world-sheet metric γ. We have included the interaction of
the string with all three massless states (the graviton, the dilaton and the antisymmetric
tensor) appearing in the lowest energy level of the spectrum of quantum string excitations
(the unphysical tachyon is removed by supersymmetry [346]). We note, for further use,
that the antisymmetric field Bµν is often called the Neveu–Schwarz/Neveu–Schwarz (NS-
NS) two-form.
     If we quantize the above action for the self-coupled fields xµ (ξ), we can expand the loop
corrections of the corresponding non-linear quantum field theory in powers of the curvature
(i.e. in higher derivatives of the metric and of the other background fields) [346]. Such
a higher derivative expansion is typical of an extended object like a string, and is indeed

                                                23
controlled by the powers of α′ , i.e. of the string length parameter λs . At each order in α′ ,
however, there is an additional higher genus expansion in the topology of the world-sheet
metric, which corresponds, in the quantum field theory limit, to the usual loop expansion,
controlled by the effective coupling parameter gs2 = exp(φ).
    The conformal invariance of the classical string motion in an external background can
then be imposed, at the quantum level, at any loop order: we obtain, in this way, a set of
differential conditions to be satisfied by the background fields for the absence of conformal
anomalies, order by order. At tree level in gs , and to lowest order in α′ , such differential
equations (in a critical number of dimensions) are [346]:
                                               1
                              Rµν + ∇µ ∇ν φ − Hµαβ Hν αβ = 0,                        (2.6)
                                               4
                                                      1 2
                              R + 2∇2 φ − (∇µ φ)2 − Hµνα     = 0,                    (2.7)
                                                     12
where Hµνα = ∂µ Bνα + cyclic permutations. By introducing the Einstein tensor, Gµν =
Rµν − gµν (R/2), the first equation can be rewritten in a more “Einsteinian form” as
                                                               
                          1                    1 2   1
           Gµν + ∇µ ∇ν φ + gµν (∇φ)2 − 2∇2 φ + Hαβγ − Hµαβ Hν αβ = 0,                        (2.8)
                          2                   12     4
and it can be easily checked that Eqs. (2.7), (2.8) can be derived by the (d + 1)-dimensional
effective action
                               Z        q                               
                           1                                      1 2
                   S = − d−1 dd+1 x |g| e−φ R + (∇φ)2 − Hµνα               .            (2.9)
                         2λs                                     12
This action (possibly supplemented by a non-perturbative dilaton potential, and/or by a
cosmological term in non-critical dimensions [346]) is the starting point for the formulation
of a string-theory-compatible cosmology in the small-curvature and weak-coupling regime,
α′ R ≪ 1, gs2 ≪ 1 (see Section 8 for higher-order corrections).
    For an illustration of scale factor duality it will now be sufficient to restrict our attention
to the gravidilaton sector of the action (2.9) (setting e.g. Hµνα = 0). We will consider an
anisotropic Bianchi-I-type metric background, with homogeneous dilaton φ = φ(t), and we
will parametrize the action in terms of the “shifted” scalar field φ (see Section 1.4 for the
notation). The field equations (2.7), (2.8) then provide a system of d + 2 equations for the
d + 1 variables {ai , φ}:
                                         2  X
                                       φ˙ −   Hi2 = 0,                                      (2.10)
                                              i

                                       Ḣi − Hi φ˙ = 0,                                     (2.11)
                                        ¨ − φ˙ 2 − X H 2 = 0.
                                       2φ                                                   (2.12)
                                                           i
                                                       i

In the absence of sources only d + 1 equations are independent (see for instance [307]; Eq.
(2.10), in particular, represents a constraint on the set of initial data, which is preserved by
the evolution).

                                                  24
   The above string cosmology equations are invariant not only under a time-reversal trans-
formation,
                       t → −t,        H → −H,                   ˙
                                                         φ˙ → −φ,                    (2.13)
but also under a transformation that inverts any one of the scale factors, preserving the
shifted dilaton,
                           ai → aei = a−1
                                       i ,          φ → φ,                          (2.14)
and which represents a so-called scale-factor duality transformation [599, 580]. Note that
the dilaton φ is not invariant under this transformation: if we invert, for instance, the first
k ≤ d scale factors, the transformed dilaton φe is determined by the condition
                                  d
                                  X                    k
                                                       X                d
                                                                        X
                        φ=φ−            ln ai = φe −         ln a
                                                                ei −           ln ai .   (2.15)
                                  i=1                  i=1             i=k+1

Thanks to scale-factor duality, given any exact solution of Eqs. (2.10)–(2.12), represented
by the set of variables
                                      {a1 , ..., ad , φ},                            (2.16)
the inversion of k ≤ d scale factors then defines a new exact solution, represented by the
set of variables        (                                       )    k
                                                                     X
                           a1−1 , ..., a−1
                                        k , ak+1 , ..., ad , φ − 2         ln ai .       (2.17)
                                                                     i=1

   Consider in particular the isotropic case ai = a, where all the scale factors get inverted,
and the duality transformation takes the form:

                       a → ã = a−1 ,                   φ → φ̃ = φ − 2d ln a.            (2.18)

When a → a−1 the Hubble parameter H = d(ln a)/dt goes into −H so that, to each of the
two solutions related by time reversal, H(t) and H(−t), is also associated a dual solution,
H̃(t) and H̃(−t), respectively (see Fig. 2.2). The space of solutions, in a string cosmology
context, is thus richer than in the standard Einstein cosmology, because of the combined
invariance under duality and time-reversal transformations. In string cosmology, a solution
has in general four branches: a(t), a(−t), a−1 (t), a−1 (−t). Two branches describe expansion
(H > 0), the other two branches describe contraction (H < 0). Also, as illustrated in Fig.
2.2, for two branches the curvature scale (∼ H 2 ) grows in time, so that they describe a
Universe that evolves towards a singularity, with a typical “pre-big bang” behaviour; for
the other two branches the curvature scale decreases, so that the corresponding Universe
emerges from a singularity, with a typical “post-big bang” behaviour.
    What is important, in our context, is that to any given decelerated, expanding solu-
tion, H(t) > 0, with decreasing curvature, Ḣ(t) < 0 (typical of the standard cosmological
scenario), is always associated an inflationary “dual partner” describing accelerated expan-
      e
sion, H(−t)                             ė
            > 0, and growing curvature, H(−t) > 0. This pairing of solutions (which has

                                                  25
                                                     H


                      Expanding                                             Expanding
                      post-big bang                                         pre-big bang

                                 ~
                                 H(-t)                           H(t)




                                                           al
                                                          rs
                                                      ve
                                                     re



                                                                  duality
                                  duality
                                                                                           t




                                                e
                                            tim
                                 H(-t)
                                                                 ~
                                                                 H(t)

                       Contracting                                          Contracting
                       post-big bang                                        pre-big bang




     Figure 2.2: The four branches of the low-energy string cosmology backgrounds.


no analogue in the context of the Einstein cosmology, where there is no dilaton, and the
duality symmetry cannot be implemented) naturally suggests a “self-dual” completion of
standard cosmology, in which the Universe smoothly evolves from the inflationary pre-big
              e
bang branch H(−t)    to the post-big bang branch H(t) (after an appropriate regularization
of the curvature singularity appearing in the lowest-order solutions).
    As a simple example of the four cosmological branches, we may consider here the par-
ticular isotropic solution defined in the positive range of the time coordinate,
                                 √
                    a = (t/t0 )1/ d ,               φ = − ln(t/t0 ),                  t > 0,            (2.19)

which is singular at t = 0 and satisfies identically the set of equations (2.10) – (2.12).
By applying a duality and a time-reversal transformation we obtain the four inequivalent
solutions
                                  √
                    a± (t) = t±1/ d ,                     φ(t) = − ln t,                       t > 0,
                                           √
                                        ±1/ d
                    a± (−t) = (−t)              ,         φ(−t) = − ln(−t),                t < 0,       (2.20)

corresponding to the four branches illustrated in Fig. 2.2. These solutions are separated by
a curvature singularity at t = 0; they describe decelerated expansion a+ (t), decelerated con-
traction a− (t), accelerated contraction a+ (−t), accelerated expansion a− (−t) (the solution
is accelerated or decelerated according to whether ȧ and ä have the same or opposite signs,
respectively). The curvature is growing for a± (−t), decreasing for a± (t). Note that the


                                                      26
transformation connecting two different branches represents in this case not really a sym-
metry, but rather a group acting on the space of solutions, transforming non-equivalent con-
formal backgrounds into each other, like in the case of the Narain transformations [498, 499].
    For further applications, it is also important to consider the dilaton evolution in the
various branches of Eq. (2.20). Using the definition (1.23),
                                                      √       
                    φ± (±t) = φ(±t) + d ln a± (±t) = ± d − 1 ln(±t).                 (2.21)

It follows that, in a phase of growing curvature (t < 0, t → 0− ), the dilaton is growing only
for an expanding metric, a− (−t). This means that, in the isotropic case, the expanding
inflationary solutions describe a cosmological evolution away from the string perturbative
vacuum (H = 0, φ = −∞), i.e. are solutions characterized by a growing string coupling,
ġs = (exp φ/2)˙ > 0. The string perturbative vacuum thus naturally emerges as the initial
state for a state of pre-big bang inflationary evolution. This is to be contrasted with the
recently proposed “ekpyrotic” scenario [412], where the “pre-big bang” configuration (i.e.
the phase of growing curvature preceding the brane collision that simulates the big bang
explosion) is contracting even in the S-frame [413] and indeed corresponds to a phase of
decreasing dilaton.
    Note that in a more general, anisotropic case, and in the presence of contracting dimen-
sions, a growing-curvature solution is associated to a growing dilaton only for a large enough
number of expanding dimensions. To make this point more precise, consider the particular,
exact solution of Eqs. (2.10)–(2.12), with d expanding and n contracting dimensions, and
scale factors a(t) and b(t), respectively:
                         √                    √
             a = (−t)−1/ d+n ,     b = (−t)1/ d+n ,     φ = − ln(−t),     t → 0− .      (2.22)

This gives                                           √
                                                n−d− d+n
                      φ = φ + d ln a + n ln b =   √      ln(−t),                        (2.23)
                                                    d+n
so that the dilaton is growing if
                                           √
                                      d + d + n > n.                                    (2.24)

    We note, incidentally, that this result may have interesting implications for a possi-
ble “hierarchy” of the present size of extra dimensions, if we assume that our Universe
starts evolving from the string perturbative vacuum (i.e. with initial φ̇ > 0). Indeed, in a
superstring theory context (d + n = 10), it follows that the initial number of expanding di-
mensions is d > 3, while only n < 6 may be contracting. A subsequent freezing, or late-time
contraction (possibly induced by quantum effects [130]), of d − 3 dimensions will eventually
leave only three expanding dimensions, but with a possible huge asymmetry in the spatial
sections of our Universe, even in the sector of the “internal” dimensions (see Refs. [109, 10],
and the discussion of Section 8.5, for a possible mechanism selecting d = 3 as the maximal,
final number of expanding dimensions in a string- or brane-dominated Universe).

                                              27
    The invariance of the gravidilaton equations (2.10)–(2.12) is in general broken by a
dilaton potential V (φ), unless V is just a function of φ. The invariance, however, is still
valid in the presence of matter sources, provided they transform in a way that is compatible
with the string equations of motion in the given background [318] (see the next subsection).
In the perfect-fluid approximation, in particular, a scale-factor duality transformation is
associated to a “reflection” of the equation of state [599].
    Consider in fact the addition to the action (2.9) of a matter action Sm , minimally coupled
to the S-frame metric (but uncoupled to the dilaton), and describing an anisotropic fluid
with diagonal stress tensor,
          2 δSm
   Tµν = √        ,      Tµ ν = diag(ρ, −pi δij ),             pi /ρ = γi = const,   ρ = ρ(t).   (2.25)
          −g δgµν
The field equations (2.8) are now completed by a source term
                                                                   
                   1                    1 2   1            1
    Gµν + ∇µ ∇ν φ + gµν (∇φ)2 − 2∇2 φ + Hαβγ − Hµαβ Hν αβ = eφ Tµν                               (2.26)
                   2                   12     4            2
(in units in which 2λd−1
                     s   = 1), and the cosmological equations (2.10)–(2.12) become
                                           2  X
                                         φ˙ −   Hi2 = eφ ρ,                                      (2.27)
                                                  i
                                                      1
                                         Ḣi − Hi φ˙ = eφ pi ,                                   (2.28)
                                                      2
                                          ¨    ˙ 2   X
                                         2φ − φ −       H 2 = 0,i                                (2.29)
                                                           i

where we have introduced the “shifted” density and pressure
                        √        Y                    √      Y
                   ρ = ρ −g = ρ ai ,             p = p −g = p ai .                               (2.30)
                                     i                                         i

They are a system of d + 2 independent equations for the d + 2 variables {ai , φ, ρ}. Their
combination gives                       X
                                   ρ̇ +   Hi pi = 0,                                  (2.31)
                                              i
which represents the usual covariant conservation of the source energy density. The above
equations with sources are invariant under time reflection and under the duality transfor-
mation [599]
                    ai → a−1
                          i ,      φ → φ,       ρ → ρ,      pi → −pi ,              (2.32)
which preserves ρ but changes ρ in a non-trivial way, and“reflects” the barotropic equation
of state, γi → −γi . Thus, a cosmological solution is still characterized by four distinct
branches.
    We will present here a simple isotropic example, corresponding to the power-law evolu-
tion
                          a ∼ tα ,      φ ∼ −β ln t,       p = γρ                   (2.33)

                                                      28
(see the next subsection for more general solutions). We use (2.27), (2.29), (2.31) as inde-
pendent equations. The integration of Eq. (2.31) immediately gives

                                              ρ = ρ0 a−dγ ;                                 (2.34)

Eq. (2.27) is then satisfied, provided

                                             dγα + β = 2.                                   (2.35)

Finally, Eq. (2.29) leads to the constraint

                                         2β − β 2 − dα2 = 0.                                (2.36)

We then have a (quadratic) system of two equations for the two parameters α, β (note that,
if α is a solution for a given γ, then also −α is a solution, associated to −γ). We have in
general two solutions. The flat-space solution, β = 2, α = 0, corresponds to a non-trivial
dilaton evolving in a frozen pseudo-Euclidean background, sustained by the energy density
of dust matter (γ = 0), according to Eq. (2.28). For γ 6= 0 we obtain instead
                                     2γ                            2
                            α=              ,            β=              ,                  (2.37)
                                   1 + dγ 2                     1 + dγ 2

which fixes the time evolution of a and φ:
                                    2γ                           2
                           a ∼ t 1+dγ2 ,            φ=−                ln t,                (2.38)
                                                              1 + dγ 2
and also of the more conventional variables ρ, φ:

                                                                          2(dγ − 1)
              ρ = ρa−d = ρ0 a−d(1+γ) ,              φ = φ + d ln a =                ln t.   (2.39)
                                                                           1 + dγ 2

    This particular solution reproduces the small-curvature limit of the general solution
with perfect fluid sources sufficiently far from the singularity, as we shall see in the next
subsection. As in the vacuum solution (2.19), there are four branches, related by time-
reversal and by the duality transformation (2.32), and characterized by the scale factors
                                                                  2
                                   a± (±t) ∼ (±t)±2γ/(1+dγ ) .                              (2.40)

    For d = 3, γ = 1/3 and t > 0 we recover in particular the standard, radiation-dominated
solution with constant dilaton:

             a ∼ t1/2 ,         ρ = 3p ∼ a−4 ,            φ = const,            t → +∞,     (2.41)

describing decelerated expansion and decreasing curvature:

                      ȧ > 0,            ä < 0,        Ḣ < 0,           φ̇ = 0,           (2.42)

                                                   29
                                H                                      gs = exp (   2)




                                                    t                                          t
                 pre-big bang       post-big bang            pre-big bang      post-big bang



Figure 2.3: Qualitative time evolution of the curvature scale and of the string coupling for
a typical self-dual solution of the string-cosmology equations.

typical of the post-big bang radiation era. Through a duality and time-reversal transfor-
mation we obtain the “dual” complement:
             a ∼ (−t)−1/2 ,         φ ∼ −3 ln(−t),           ρ = −3p ∼ a−2 ,             t → −∞,   (2.43)
which is still an exact solution of the string cosmology equations, and describes accelerated
(i.e. inflationary) expansion, with growing dilaton and growing curvature:
                       ȧ > 0,            ä > 0,            Ḣ > 0,           φ̇ > 0              (2.44)
(the unconventional equation of state, γ = −1/3, is typical of a gas of stretched strings, see
[314, 315] and the next subsection).
   This confirms that, if we start with our present cosmological phase in which the dilaton is
constant (in order to guarantee a constant strength of gravitational and gauge interactions),
and we postulate for the early Universe a dual complement preceding the big bang explosion,
then string theory requires for the pre-big bang phase not only growing curvature, but also
growing dilaton.
    In other words, string theory naturally suggests to identify the initial configuration
of our Universe with a state asymptotically approaching the flat, cold and empty string
perturbative vacuum, H 2 → 0, exp(φ) → 0. As a consequence, the initial cosmological
evolution occurs in the small curvature (H 2 /Ms2 ≪ 1) and weak coupling (gs ≪ 1) regime,
and can be appropriately described by the lowest order effective action (2.9) (see Fig. 2.3).
The solutions (2.41) and (2.43) provide a particular, explicit representation of the scenario
represented in Fig. 2.3, for the two asymptotic regimes of t large and positive, Eq. (2.41),
and t large and negative, Eq. (2.43).
    It should be mentioned, to conclude this subsection, that the invariance under the
discrete symmetry group Z2d , generated by the inversion of d scale factors, can be generalized
so as to be extended to spatially flat solutions of more general scalar–tensor theories [142,
434], with the generic Brans–Dicke parameter ω, described by the action
                              Z                  h                    i
                                       √
                       S = − dd+1 x −g e−φ R − ω(∇φ)2 − 2Λ .                             (2.45)


                                                        30
The case ω = −1 corresponds to the string effective action. For ω 6= −(d + 1)/d, the
equations of an isotropic and spatially flat background (with scale factor a(t)) are invariant
under the transformation α → α, e φ → φ, e where α = ln a, and [434]

           d − 1 + dω     2(1 + ω) e                      2d        d − 1 + dω e
      α=              α
                      e−            φ,         φ=−               α
                                                                 e+            φ           (2.46)
           d + 1 + dω    d + 1 + dω                   d + 1 + dω    d + 1 + dω
(when ω = −1 one recovers the transformation (2.18)). Similar symmetries are also present
in a restricted class of homogeneous, Bianchi-type models [169] (but the presence of spatial
curvature tends to break the scale-factor duality symmetry); for the Bianchi-I-type met-
rics, in addition, the discrete transformation (2.46) can be embedded in a continuous O(3)
symmetry group.
    It should be stressed, however, that when ω 6= −1 such generalized transformations
do not necessarily associate, to any decelerated solution of the standard scenario, an infla-
tionary solution with growing dilaton. In this sense, a self-dual cosmological scenario in
which inflation emerges naturally from the perturbative vacuum seems just to be a peculiar
prediction of string theory, in its low energy limit.
  In the next subsection we will extend the discussion of this section to more general
models of background and sources.


2.3   O(d, d)-covariance of the cosmological equations

The target-space duality introduced in the previous subsection is not restricted to the gra-
vidilaton sector and to cosmological backgrounds, but is expected to be a general property
of the solutions of the string effective action (possibly valid at all orders [560, 367], with
the appropriate generalizations [476, 397]).
    Already at the lowest order, in fact, the inversion of the scale factor is only a special
case of a more general transformation of the global O(d, d) group which leaves invariant the
action (2.9) for all background characterized by d Abelian isometries, and which mixes in
a non-trivial way the components of the metric and of the antisymmetric tensor Bµν (see
[340] for a general review).
    Such an invariance property of the action can also be extended to non-Abelian isometries
[206], but then there are problems for “non-semisimple” isometry groups [313]. Here we shall
restrict ourselves to the Abelian case, and we shall consider (for cosmological applications) a
set of background fields {φ, gµν , Bµν } which is isometric with respect to d spatial translations
and for which there exists a synchronous frame where g00 = 1, g0i = 0, B0µ = 0, and all the
non-zero components of gij , Bij (as well as the dilaton itself) are only dependent on time.
   In order to illustrate the invariance properties of such a class of backgrounds under global
O(d, d) transformations, we shall first rewrite the action (2.9) directly in the synchronous
gauge (since, for the moment, we are not interested in the field equations, but only in the


                                               31
symmetries of the action). We set gij = −γij and find, in this gauge,
                      1                   1          1  −1  j  −1  j
               Γij 0 =  γ̇ij ,   Γ0i j = g jk ġik =    g ġ   = γ γ̇
                      2                   2          2       i           i
                        1          2    1          1         
               R0 0 = − Tr γ −1 γ̇ − Tr γ −1 γ̈ − Tr γ̇ −1 γ̇ ,
                        4                 2              2
                 j      1  −1  j 1  −1  j  −1  1  −1 −1  j
               Ri = − γ γ̈           −      γ γ̇     Tr γ γ̇ +      γ γ̇γ γ̇   ,                                               (2.47)
                        2         i     4          i            2            i

where                                                            ij
                                   Tr γ −1 γ̇ = γ −1                      γ̇ji = gij ġji ,                                    (2.48)
                                                           
and so on [note also that γ̇ −1 means d γ               −1     /dt]. Similarly we find, for the antisymmetric
tensor,
                                                                                                              ij
                         H0ij = Ḃij ,                H 0ij = gik gjl Ḃkl = γ −1 Ḃγ −1                               ,
                                                                                             2
                         Hµνα H µνα = 3H0ij H 0ij = −3Tr γ −1 Ḃ                                   .                           (2.49)
Let us introduce the shifted dilaton, by absorbing the spatial volume into φ, as in Section
1.4:                               q
                                     | det gij |e−φ = e−φ ,                          (2.50)
from which                                                                                            
                                   1 d                   1
                         φ˙ = φ̇ −      ln (det γ) = φ̇ − Tr γ −1 γ̇ .                   (2.51)
                                   2 dt                  2
By collecting the various contributions from φ, R and Hµνα2 , the action (2.9) can be rewritten

as:
                                          Z                "
                                λs                             2 1          2                                           
                            S=−               dte     −φ
                                                             φ˙ + Tr γ −1 γ̇ − Tr γ −1 γ̈
                                2                                4
                                                                                                               #
                             1          
                                            ˙
                                                         1          2
                            − Tr γ̇ −1 γ̇ + φTr   γ −1 γ̇ + Tr γ −1 Ḃ    .                                                    (2.52)
                             2                             4

We can now eliminate the second derivatives, and the mixed terms containing φ˙ γ̇, by noting
that
             d h −φ  −1 i           h                     
                                                                    ˙
                                                                                i
                e Tr γ γ̇ = e−φ Tr γ −1 γ̈ + Tr γ̇ −1 γ̇ − φTr            γ −1 γ̇ .    (2.53)
             dt
                                    
Finally, by using the identity γ −1 ˙ = −γ −1 γ̇γ −1 , we can rewrite the action in quadratic
form, modulo a total derivative, as
                               Z                                                                                  
                      λs                            2 1         2 1         2
                  S=−              dte   −φ
                                                  φ˙ − Tr γ −1 γ̇ + Tr γ −1 Ḃ    .                                            (2.54)
                      2                               4             4

    This action can be set into a more compact form by using the 2d × 2d matrix M , defined
in terms of the spatial components of the metric and of the antisymmetric tensor,
                                                                                 
                                         G−1              −G−1 B
                             M=                                                       ,
                                         BG−1           G − BG−1 B
                             G = gij ≡ −γij ,                   G−1 ≡ gij ,                   B ≡ Bij ,                        (2.55)

                                                               32
and using also the matrix η, representing the invariant metric of the O(d, d) group in the
off-diagonal representation:                    
                                            0 I
                                      η=                                            (2.56)
                                            I 0
(I is the unit d-dimensional matrix). By computing M η, Ṁ η and (Ṁ η)2 we find, in fact,
                 2                                    2                                2                  2 
                                  −1            −1                                   −1                   −1
        Tr Ṁ η        = 2Tr γ̇        γ̇ + γ        Ḃ          = 2Tr − γ                γ̇        + γ        Ḃ          ,   (2.57)

so that the action can be rewritten as [477, 478]
                                               Z                                          
                                          λs               2 1        2
                                S=−                dte−φ φ˙ + Tr Ṁ η   .                                                      (2.58)
                                          2                  8

    We may note, at this point, that M itself is a (symmetric) matrix element of the pseudo-
orthogonal O(d, d) group, since

                                       M T ηM = η,                       M = MT ,                                              (2.59)

for any B and G. Therefore:
                                                                       2                    
                           M η = ηM −1 ,                         Ṁ η        = η M −1 ˙M η,                                    (2.60)

and the action can be finally rewritten in the form
                                          Z                                                   
                                λs                             2 1
                            S=−                 dte  −φ
                                                             φ˙ + Tr Ṁ M −1 ˙ ,                                               (2.61)
                                2                                8
which is explicitly invariant under global O(d, d) transformations preserving the shifted
dilaton φ:
                     φ → φ,      M →M   f = ΛT M Λ,        ΛT ηΛ = η.              (2.62)
When B = 0, the matrix M is block-diagonal, and the special O(d, d) transformation
represented by Λ = η corresponds to an inversion of the metric tensor:

               M = diag(G−1 , G),                         f = ΛT M Λ = ηM η = diag(G, G−1 ),
                                                          M                                                                    (2.63)

so that Ge = G−1 . For a diagonal metric, in particular, G = a2 I, and the invariance under
the scale factor duality transformation (2.18) is recovered as a particular case of the global
O(d, d) symmetry (as already anticipated).
   This O(d, d) invariance holds even in the presence of sources representing bulk string
matter [318], namely sources evolving consistently with the solutions of the string equations
of motion in the background we are considering. A distribution of non-interacting strings,
minimally coupled to the metric and the antisymmetric tensor of an O(d, d)-covariant back-
ground, is in fact characterized by a stress tensor (source of gµν ) and by an antisymmetric
current (source of Bµν ), which are automatically O(d, d)-covariant).

                                                                 33
   In order to illustrate this important point we add to Eq. (2.9) an action Sm describing
matter sources coupled to g and to B, and we define
                     1√        δSm                        1√          δSm
                        −gTµν = µν ,                         −gJ µν =      .          (2.64)
                     2         δg                         2           δBµν

The variation with respect to the dilaton, to gµν and Bµν gives then, respectively, Eqs.
(2.7), Eq. (2.26) and the additional equation
                                                     
                                    ∇µ e−φ H µαβ = J αβ .                             (2.65)

For a background with d spatial isometries, and in the synchronous gauge, such field equa-
tions can be written in matrix form using M, φ, and a new set of “shifted” variables defined
as follows:
                       √                   √                    √
                   ρ = −gT0 0 ,         θ = −gT ij ,       J = −gJ ij ,               (2.66)
where θ and J are d × d matrices. In particular, the dilaton equation (2.7) takes the form
                                    2
                                        ¨ − 1 Tr (Ṁ η)2 = 0,
                                  φ˙ − 2φ                                             (2.67)
                                            8
the (0, 0) component of Eq. (2.26) gives
                                      2 1
                                    φ˙ + Tr (Ṁ η)2 = ρeφ ,                           (2.68)
                                        8
while the spatial part of Eq. (2.26), combined with Eq. (2.65), can be written in the form

                                      d −φ
                                         (e M η Ṁ ) = T ,                            (2.69)
                                      dt
where T is a 2d × 2d matrix composed with θ and J:
                                                                          
                                 −J,                −θG + JB
                     T =                                                              (2.70)
                               Gθ − BJ,       GJG + BJB − GθB − BθG

(see [318] for an explicit computation). By differentiating Eq. (2.68), using Eqs. (2.67),
(2.69), and the identity
                                  (M η Ṁ η)2 = −(Ṁ η)2 ,                          (2.71)
we obtain the generalized energy conservation equation, written in matrix form as
                                          1
                                   ρ̇ +     Tr (T ηM η Ṁ η) = 0.                     (2.72)
                                          4

   The O(d, d) covariance of the string cosmology equations is thus preserved even in the
presence of matter sources, provided T transforms in the same way as M . In that case, the
whole set of equations (2.67)–(2.69) is left invariant by the generalized transformation

                  φ → φ,         ρ → ρ,        M → ΛT M Λ,          T → ΛT T Λ,       (2.73)

                                                 34
where ΛT ηΛ = η. This is indeed what happens if the sources are represented by a gas of
non-self-interacting strings.
    Suppose in fact that the matter action is given by the sum over all components of the
                            P i
string distribution, Sm = i Sstrings  , where we use the action (2.5), and we choose the
conformally flat gauge for the world-sheet metric (i.e. γij = 0, R(2) = 0):
                              Z
                        1
         Sstring   = −    ′
                                  dd+1 x δd+1 (x − X(σ, τ )) dσdτ
                       4πα
                       h                                                           i
                      ×    Ẋ µ Ẋ ν − X ′µ X ′ν gµν (x) + Ẋ µ X ′ν − X ′µ Ẋ ν Bµν (x) .   (2.74)

Here σ and τ are the world-sheet coordinates, Ẋ = dX/dτ and X ′ = dX/dσ. The variation
with respect to g and B gives the tensors (2.66), which depend on the world-sheet integral of
a form bilinear in X µ (σ, τ ). The variation with respect to X µ gives the string equations of
motion, the variation with respect to γij (before imposing the gauge) gives the constraints.
If we have a solution X µ of the equations of motion, in a given background M (t), and we
perform an O(d, d) transormation M → M        f = ΛT M Λ, the new solution X    e µ is found to
correspond to transformed matrices θe and J,  e
                                                 which combine to give Te = ΛT T Λ [318]. The
O(d, d) covariance is thus preserved, provided the matter sources transform according to
the string equations of motion, which can themselves be written in a fully covariant form.
    Let us now exploit this O(d, d) covariance to find more general solutions of the string cos-
mology equations, and more general examples of duality-related backgrounds corresponding
to possible models for the pre-big bang scenario. Let us introduce a convenient (dimension-
less) time-coordinate x, such that
                                          dx = Lρ dt                                      (2.75)
(L is a constant length). Assuming that the equation of state can be written in terms of a
given 2d × 2d matrix Γ(x), such that

                                             ρ dΓ = T dx,                                    (2.76)

we can integrate a first time Eqs. (2.67)–(2.69), also with the help of the identity (2.71).
The result is [321]

                                         ′      2
                                       φ =−        (x + x0 ),                                (2.77)
                                              D(x)
                                                4Γ(x)
                                       M ηM ′ =       ,                                      (2.78)
                                                 D(x)

where
                                             1
                          D(x) ≡ (x + x0 )2 −  Tr (Γη)2 = 4L2 ρe−φ                    (2.79)
                                             2
(a prime denotes differentiation with respect to x, and x0 is an integration constant).



                                                    35
   By exploiting the fact that M is a symmetric O(d, d) matrix, M ηM = η, and that
M ηΓ = −ΓηM , because of the definition of T (see [318]), the above equations can be
formally integrated to give
                                                       Z
                                                 dx
                                 φ(x) = φ0 − 2      (x + x0 ),                                          (2.80)
                                                 D
                                                   Z        
                                                       dx
                                 M (x) = Px exp −4        Γη M0 ,                                       (2.81)
                                                       D
where φ0 is a constant, M0 a constant symmetric O(d, d) matrix, and Px denotes the “x-
ordering” of the exponential. For any given “equation of state” T = T (ρ), providing an
integrable relation for Γ(x), according to Eq. (2.76), the general exact solution of the
low-energy string cosmology equations (for space-independent fields and vanishing dilaton
potential) is then represented by Eqs. (2.79)–(2.81).
    Such solutions contain in general singularities for the curvature and the string coupling,
in correspondence with the zero of D(x). Near the singularity (i.e., for D(x) → 0) the
contribution of the matter sources becomes negligible with respect to the curvature terms
in the field equations (as,in general relativity, for the Kasner anisotropic solutions [438]),
and one recovers the general vacuum solutions presented in [477]. This can be shown
in general for any background M (x), and any kind of matter distribution Γ(x) [321]; for
further applications, however, it will be sufficient to report here the case of anisotropic but
torsionless (B = 0) backgrounds, with diagonal metric gij = −a2i δij , and fluid sources with
a barotropic equation of state, as in Eq. (2.25).
   In this case we obtain, from the previous definitions,
                                                   a′i     !                                   
                            ′
                                       0           ai  δij                     0       pi δij
                    M ηM = 2          a′                       , T =                                ,
                                 − aii δij     0                             −pi δij     0
                                          
                           0      Γi δij
                    Γ=                       ,                  Γi = γi x + xi ,
                         −Γi δij      0
                                           X
                    D = (x + x0 )2 −           (γi x + xi )2 = α(x − x+ )(x − x− ),                     (2.82)
                                           i

where
                    q                      X
             pi = pi |g|,       α=1−               γi2 ,
                                               i
                                                                                           
                                                                   !2                 !1/2 
                    1 X                           X                        X                
             x± =           γi xi − x0 ±              γi xi − x0        +α   x2i − x20       ;        (2.83)
                    α
                      i                           i                        i
                                                                                             
                                                                                             

x± are the zeros of D, and xi , x0 are integration constants. The general solution (2.79)–
(2.81) reduces to [320]
                                                                    x − x+ αi
                        ai = a0i |(x − x+ )(x − x− )|γi /α |               | ,                          (2.84)
                                                                    x − x−

                                                       36
                                                        x − x+ −σ
                         eφ = eφ0 |(x − x+ )(x − x− )|−1/α |     | ,                                        (2.85)
                                                        x − x−
                             α φ0                               x − x+ −σ
                         ρ=     e |(x − x+ )(x − x− )|(α−1)/α |        | ,                                  (2.86)
                            4L2                                 x − x−

where                                                                P
                   X                                       αxi + γi (    i γi x i − x 0 )
              σ=        αi γi ,     αi =       P                              P 2           ,             (2.87)
                                            α (                        2                  2 1/2
                    i                                    i γi xi − x0 ) + α( i xi − x0 )
and ai0 , φ0 are additional integration constants.
    This solution has two curvature singularities at x± . Near the singularity the sources are
negligible, and one recovers the anisotropic vacuum solution of string cosmology in critical
dimensions [599,P 489]. Indeed, for x → x± , one finds from Eqs. (2.75) and (2.86) that
         α/(1±α  αi γi )
|x| ∼ |t|                , and the solution reduces to
                                              ±
                         ai (t) ∼ |t − t± |βi ,                  φ ∼ − ln |t − t± |,                        (2.88)

where                                                                X
                                  x i ± γi x ±
                          βi± =                ,                            (βi± )2 = 1.                    (2.89)
                                   x0 + x±                              i

In the large-|x| (small-curvature) limit, on the contrary, the relation between x and cosmic
time is |x| ≃ |t|α/(2−α) , and the solution (2.84)–(2.86) behaves like (for |x| → ±∞)
                                            P 2                                  2
                     ai (t) ∼ |t|2γi /(1+     γi )
                                                     ,            φ∼−            P         ln |t|,
                                                                            1+       γi2
                              P                                                 P 2            P 2
                                 γi − 1
                     φ∼2          P     ln |t|,                   ρ ∼ |t|−2          γi /(1+     γi )
                                                                                                        .   (2.90)
                              1 + γi2

    We may note, in general, that the relative importance of the matter sources with respect
to the curvature is measured by the ratio (see Eq. (2.68),

                                 8ρeφ             2      D            ρeφ
               Ω(x) = −                       ≡                =        P                                   (2.91)
                           (d − 1) Tr (Ṁ η)2   d − 1 Tr (Γη)2   (d − 1) i Hi2

(normalized in such a way that one recovers the usual critical energy–density ratio, Ω = ρ/ρc ,
when φ is constant and the metric is isotropic). It follows that Ω → 0 when x → x± , while
in the opposite limit |x| → ∞, dominated by the matter sources, Ω goes to a constant,
                                                                P
                                                1 − i γi2
                                     Ω → Ω∞ =        P      ,                                               (2.92)
                                              (d − 1) i γi2

which is obviously Ω∞ = 1 for the isotropic, radiation-dominated background with γi = 1/d
and constant dilaton.
    Now it can easily be checked that, in the isotropic case ai = a, γi = γ, the vacuum
solution (2.20) and the matter-dominated solutions (2.38), (2.39) presented in the previous


                                                          37
subsection can be directly recovered from Eqs. (2.88) and (2.90), respectively. As before,
we have invariance under time reflections and under the duality transformation ai → a−1   i ,
γi → −γi . In addition, we can now perform more complicated O(d, d) transformations
to find anisotropic and non-diagonal pre-big bang backgrounds [308] (the possibility of
singularity-free solutions, in this context, will be discussed in Section 8). It should be
stressed, however, that the “O(d, d) complement” of a standard cosmological solution is in
general associated to the introduction of an effective viscosity in the matter stress tensor,
as pointed out in [318].
   To conclude this subsection let us finally report the cosmic-time and conformal-time
parametrization of the isotropic solutions, in the asymptotic limit of large and small curva-
ture, both in the S-frame and in the E-frame.
    The small-curvature limit, dominated by a perfect fluid with p/ρ = γ, has been given
in cosmic time in Eqs. (2.38), (2.39). In the conformal time gauge, defined by dt = adη, we
obtain
                                      2         dγ − 1
                a(η) ∼ |η|2γ/(1−2γ+dγ ) ,   φ∼         ln a,  ρ ∼ a−d(γ+1) .         (2.93)
                                                   γ
Instead, the vacuum, dilaton-dominated limit (2.20) becomes, in conformal time,
                                   √                √ √
                   a± (η) ∼ |η|±1/( d∓1) ,    φ± ∼ d( d ∓ 1) ln a± .                         (2.94)

    In the E-frame, the scale-factor and the curvature parameters are obtained through the
transformation (1.8), (1.11) (the conformal time is obviously the same in both frames). The
small-curvature limit (2.38), (2.39) becomes, in cosmic time,
                                         s
                                              2 (d − 1)(1 − dγ)
            a
            e(t)     eβ
              e ∼ |t| ,           φe ∼                          ln a
                                                                   e,              e−2/β ,
                                                                              ρe ∼ a         (2.95)
                                             d−1     γ−1

where                p
                     |g|                                            2(1 − γ)
             ρe = ρ p     = ρeφ(d+1)/(d−1) ,         β=                                  .   (2.96)
                     |ge|                                 (d − 1)(1 + dγ 2 ) − 2(dγ − 1)
In conformal time,
                                                                      2
                                 aE (η) ∼ |η|−2(γ−1)/(d−1)(1−2γ+dγ ) .                       (2.97)
The vacuum, dilaton-dominated limit (2.20) becomes, in cosmic time,
                                                             q
                         a
                         e± (t)   e 1/d ,
                             e ∼ |t|                 φe± ∼ ± 2d(d − 1) ln a
                                                                          e± ,               (2.98)

and
                                             e± (η) ∼ |η|1/(d−1)
                                             a                                               (2.99)
in conformal time.
    The above solutions will be used to discuss the kinematics of the phase of pre-big bang
inflation (in the next subsection), and to compute the corresponding amplification of the

                                                     38
quantum fluctuations (see Section 4). For the discussion of more general homogeneous so-
lutions (see for instance [60, 57, 59]), we refer the reader to the existing literature, and
in particular to the detailed phase-space analysis of the string cosmology equations per-
formed including non-trivial two-form potentials (Bµν 6= 0), moduli fields, spatial curvature,
anisotropy, and a cosmological constant in both the matter and the gravidilaton parts of
the action [84, 85, 86].


2.4    Kinematics of pre-big bang inflation

The symmetry properties of the string effective action suggest a “self-dual” cosmological
scenario, in which the Universe evolves from an initial configuration approaching (asymp-
totically) the string perturbative vacuum (H → 0, φ → −∞). Such a state, on the other
hand, is particularly appropriate to provide the initial conditions, because it is unstable
with respect to the decay into an inflationary phase eventually driven by the dilaton kinetic
energy. A small inhomogeneity of the perturbative vacuum is indeed sufficient to trigger
inflation, as we shall discuss in Section 3. Or, keeping homogeneity, a small perturbation
represented by a constant non-zero energy density is also sufficient.
    In the first models of pre-big bang evolution [319, 321], such a perturbation was gener-
ated by a (sufficiently diluted) gas of fundamental strings, as its presence tends to enhance
the instability of the full system (background fields plus mattere sources). Suppose in fact
that we look for self-consistent, simultaneous solutions of the gravidilaton background equa-
tions (2.27)–(2.29) and of the string equations of motion (in the same background), obtained
from Eq. (2.74) with Bµν = 0:
                                                                        
                         Ẍ µ − X ′′µ + Γµαβ Ẋ α + X ′α     Ẋ β − X ′β = 0,
                                                  
                         gµν Ẋ µ Ẋ ν + X ′µ X ′ν = 0,             gµν Ẋ µ X ′ν = 0.         (2.100)

Given a consistent embedding X µ (σ, τ ), the sum over all the stress tensors of each individual
string,
                                  Z                            
          √                 1
           −gT µν (x) =               dσdτ Ẋ µ Ẋ ν − X ′µ X ′ν δd+1 (x − X(σ, τ ))           (2.101)
                           2πα′
(after an appropriate averaging procedure) provides the effective sources to be inserted into
the background equations.
    The above system of string and background equations can be solved in a perturbative
way [302, 303], by imposing the string perturbative vacuum as asymptotic initial conditions
at t → −∞. To zeroth order, the background manifold is flat, and the string solutions are
characterized by |Ẋ 0 | ≫ |X ′0 |, |Ẋ i | = |X ′i |, corresponding to a pressureless effective stress
tensor, T00 = const, Tii = 0 (dust matter, in the perfect-fluid approximation).
    To first order, the background solution thus corresponds to the case γi = 0 and to the

                                                   39
negative branch (x < x− ) of Eqs. (2.84)–(2.86), namely

                            t − 2tc −βi                           16L2 e−φ0                     eφ0
             ai (t) = ai0               ,              eφ =                    ,           ρ=       = const,
                               t                                 |t(t − 2tc )|                  4L2
                                                      !1/2
                  ti                        X
             −βi = ,             tc =           t2i          ,          t≤0                                    (2.102)
                  tc                        i

(ti are integration constants). Note that t ∼ x since ρ = const, and that we have performed
a time translation to shift the singularity from x = x− to the origin. Note also that, at
t → −∞, the metric is flat and only the dilaton is rolling, φ ∼ −2 ln(−t), sustained by a
constant (pressureless) string energy density ρ = const, p = 0 (consistently with the chosen
initial conditions).
   The string equation of state keeps unchanged until a ≃ const, namely for |t| ≫ tc .
When t approaches the critical scale −tc , however, the scale factors start rolling and evolve
towards a final (expanding or contracting) accelerated configuration
                                                                                   X
                       ai (t) ∼ (−t)βi ,                |βi | < 1,                       βi2 = 1,              (2.103)
                                                                                     i

reached asymptotically for |t| ≪ tc . When t ∼ −tc , therefore, the horizon |H|−1 starts
shrinking (see Section 1.3) and we know, in that regime, that extended objects become
“unstable” [551, 268, 270]. In the case of string matter, in particular, we know that the
asymptotic solutions of the string equations of motion, outside the horizon [314, 315], are
characterized by |Ẋ 0 | ≫ |X ′0 |, |Ẋ i | ≪ |X ′i | for accelerated expansion (βi < 0), and by
|Ẋ 0 | ≫ |X ′0 |, |Ẋ i | ≫ |X ′i | for accelerated contraction (0 < βi < 1). As a consequence, the
string stress tensor (2.101) satisfies, respectively, the conditions

                                   T00 ≃ Tii ,                          βi < 0,
                                   T00 ≃ −Tii ,                         0 < βi < 1,                            (2.104)

corresponding to the radiation equation of state (γ = 1/d) for accelerated contraction,
and to its dual (γ = −1/d) for accelerated expansion. In both cases, the string pressure
triggers a regime of positive feedback, which enhances the instabilitys and pushes the system
(background fields plus sources) even further away from the string perturbative vacuum
[315, 319, 302, 303].
    When |t| ≪ tc , however, the contribution of the matter sources becomes negligible in
the field equations: a first differentiation of Eq. (2.102) gives in fact

                     2ti                   2(t − tc )                                   4
          Hi =               ,     φ˙ = −             ,                ρeφ =                   = ρeφ           (2.105)
                 t(t − 2tc )              t(t − 2tc )                              t(t − 2tc )
                           2
and then ρeφ ≪ H 2 ∼ φ˙ for t → 0− . So, even if the string pressure tends to deviate
from its initial vanishing value, its dynamical effects eventually become negligible when

                                                         40
the background enters the dilaton-dominated regime. The solution (2.102) thus represents
a reliable description of the coupled system background plus string sources, both in the
|t| ≫ tc and |t| ≪ tc limits, namely in the initial and final regimes, sufficiently far from the
critical time scale t = tc [303].
    What is important, for the purpose of this section, is that the phase of pre-big bang
inflation, at low energy, is in general characterized by two possible (connected) branches: an
initial (model-dependent) phase in which matter (like string, or other sources) are possibly
important, and a second “vacuum” phase dominated by the dilaton kinetic energy. The
validity of the low energy solutions stops of course at the string scale, |t| ∼ λs . At that
point the higher order (loop and α′ ) quantum corrections come into play, but inflation
can nonetheless continue during a phase of constant curvature and linearly growing dilaton
[307], appearing as late-time attractor in the high-curvature regime (see Section 8).
    So, in spite of the fact that the inflationary epoch of the pre-big bang scenario is often
referred to as the vacuum, dilaton-driven phase appearing in the low energy solutions, it is
important to stress that the total pre-big bang inflationary period possibly contains also a
phase of “late inflation” at high curvature (as also stressed in [466]), and a phase of “early
inflation” driven by matter sources (as also stressed in [324]). To discuss the main kinematic
aspects of pre-big bang inflation, however, it will be sufficient to concentrate our attention
on the dilaton-driven, isotropic vacuum solutions given by Eq. (2.20) (or by Eq. (2.94), in
the conformal-time parametrization).
    For a quantitative estimate of the duration of the inflationary period we observe that
the ratio r, determined by the flatness problem as in Eq. (1.2), also controls the solution
of the horizon problem through the ratio
                        proper size horizon scale     H −1 (t)
                                                    ∼          ∼ r(t),                  (2.106)
                     proper size homogeneous region    a(t)

and that, for a power-law metric a ∼ tβ , such a ratio scales linearly with respect to the
conformal time coordinate,                  Z
                                   r ∼ t1−β ∼        a−1 dt ∼ η.                        (2.107)

Also, we shall assume that the standard radiation era can be extended back in time down to
the Planck scale, and that it is immediately preceded by a phase of accelerated expansion.
At the beginning of the radiation era the horizon size is then controlled by the Planck
length λP , while the proper size of the homogeneous and causally connected region inside
our present Hubble radius, rescaled down according to the decelerated evolution of the
standard scenario, is unnaturally larger than the horizon by the factor ∼ 1030 λP (as already
remarked in Subsection 1.1). During the inflationary epoch the ratio r must thus increase
by at least a factor 1030 , so as to push the homogeneous region outside the horizon, by he
amount required by the subsequent decelerated evolution. This determines the condition

                                                 < 10−30 ,
                                     |ηf |/|ηi | ∼                                      (2.108)

                                                41
where ηi and ηf mark, respectively, the beginning and the end of the inflationary period.
    Let us now suppose, for simplicity (and for a more direct comparison between the pre-
big bang and the standard inflationary scenarios), that at the end of inflation the dilaton
immediately freezes out, and that the string and Planck lengths have already comparable
sizes at η = ηf (which means exp(φf ) ∼ 1, according to Eq. (2.2)).
   If we go back in time during a dilaton-dominated phase of isotropic superinflation,
                                            √                      √
                               a ∼ (−t)−1/ d ∼ (−η)−1/( d+1) ,                           (2.109)

starting from the string/Planck scale (tf ∼ λs ), it follows
                                                        √
                                                               from (2.108) that the scale factor
is at most reduced by the factor ai /af ∼ 10    −30/(1+   d) , corresponding to a homogeneous
region, which, at the beginning of inflation, is still very large in string units, i.e. at least
                                             √             √
                                        1030 d/(1+ d) λs                                 (2.110)

(i.e. ∼ 1019 λs for d = 3). This is to be contrasted with the case of standard (although not
fully realistic) de Sitter inflation, a ∼ (−η)−1 , where, going back in time, the scale factor
during inflation is reduced by the factor 10−30 , so that the size of the initial homogeneous
region is just λP , like the horizon, which stays frozen during inflation.
    The contrast is even more striking if the initial size (2.110) is expressed in Planck units,
since, at the beginning of inflation, the string coupling gs = exp(φ/2) –and thus the Planck
length λP – is reduced with respect to its final value (λP ∼ λs ) by the factor
                                                          √d/2          √
                          gs (ηi )   λP (ηi )         ηf
                                   =          =                    < 10−15 d ,
                                                                   ∼                     (2.111)
                          gs (ηf )   λP (ηf )         ηi

so that the lower bound (2.110) for the size of the initial region can be written as
                                       √          √            √
                                    10 d(45+15 d)/(1+ d) λP                              (2.112)

(i.e. ∼ 1045 λP for d = 3). This, by the way, is exactly the initial size evalued in the E-
frame where λP is a constant, and the pre-big bang phase is represented as a contraction,
according to Eq. (2.99).
    One might think that, in such a case, the situation is not much better than in the case
of non-inflationary cosmology, where one finds that the initial size of the homogeneous part
of our Universe is greater than 1030 λP [394]. It should be noted, however, that without
inflation the initial homogeneous region has to be much bigger than the horizon. In the
pre-big bang scenario, on the contrary, the initial homogeneous region is large in Planck or
string units, but not larger than the horizon itself [286]. Indeed, during superinflation, the
horizon scale shrinks linearly in cosmic time. As we go backwards in time, in the particular
example that we are considering, the horizon increases by the factor Hi−1 /Hf−1 = (ti /tf ) =
       √      √                                                                  √   √
(ηi /ηf ) d/(1+ d) , so that, at the beginning of inflation, Hi−1 ∼ 1030 d/(1+ d) λP , i.e. the

                                                  42
initial horizon size is just the same as that of the homogeneous region (2.110) (as also
illustrated in Fig. 1.3).
    In this sense, the initial state of pre-big bang inflation is similar to the one of the standard
inflationary scenario. In one case, however, the initial horizon is large in Planck units; in
the other case it is of order 1, as an obvious consequence of the different curvature scales
at the beginning of inflation. The question about the naturalness of the initial conditions
(see the next section) thus seems to concern the initial unit of length used to measure the
size of the initial homogeneous domain: Should we use the Planck (or string) length, or the
classical radius of the causal horizon?
    The Planck length certainly provides natural units for the size of the initial homogeneous
patches when initial conditions are imposed on a cosmological state approaching the high-
curvature, quantum-gravity regime. In the pre-big bang scenario, however, initial conditions
are to be imposed when the Universe is deeply inside the low-curvature, weak-coupling,
classical regime. In that regime, the Universe does not know about the Planck length, and
the causal horizon H −1 seems to provide a natural candidate for the initial homogeneity
scale. It should be noted, to this purpose, that the formation of a large homogeneous
domain is not prevented by the amplification of quantum fluctuations [343]. However,
classical inhomogeneities, not normalized to a vacuum fluctuation spectrum, may require a
constraint on the duration of inflation stronger than Eq. (2.108), as recently pointed out in
[128].
    Note also that a large (homogeneous) Hubble horizon, if we assume the saturation of
the holographic bound [375] applied in a cosmological context [604], implies a large initial
entropy S ∼ (horizon area in Planck units) and corresponds, in a quantum context, to
a small probability that such configuration be obtained through a process of quantum
tunnelling (proportional to exp[−S]). In the context of the pre-big bang scenario, however,
quantum cosmology effects, such as tunnelling or reflection of the Wheeler–De Witt wave
function, are expected to be important towards the end of inflation, and not the beginning,
as they may be effective to exit, eventually, from the inflationary regime (see Section 9), not
to enter it, and to explain the origin of the initial state. A large entropy of the initial state,
in the weakly coupled, highly classical regime, can only correspond to a large probability of
such a configuration (proportional to exp[+S]), as expected for classical and macroscopic
configurations.
    The naturalness of the initial conditions will be discussed in Section 3. Here we note,
to conclude this subsection, that an initial state characterized by a set of large (or small)
dimensionless parameters, determined by a large initial horizon scale H −1 , is an unavoidable
aspect of all models in which inflation starts at scales smaller than Planckian. In the
standard scenario, where observational tracks of what happened before the Planck epoch
are washed out, one may regard as unnatural [394] having an initial homogeneity scale of
order H −1 whenever H is very small in Planck or string units. In the context of the pre-big


                                                43
bang scenario, however, the phenomenological imprint of the Planck epoch is not necessarily
washed out by a long and subsequent inflationary phase. The pre-Planckian history may
become visible, and the sub-Planckian initial conditions are accessible, in principle, to
observational tests, so that their naturalness can also be analysed with a Bayesan approach,
in terms of “a posteriori” probabilities, as in [129] (see also [170, 171, 168] for a discussion
of “generic” initial conditions in the pre-big bang scenario).


2.5     Frame-independence: Which is the “right” metric?

As already stressed in the previous discussion, and explicitly computed in Section 1.3, an
S-frame inflationary solution of the string cosmology equations, when transformed to the
E-frame, tends to describe a phase of accelerated contraction. This is strictly true only
for isotropic backgrounds because, if the metric is anisotropic, and there is a large enough
number of (S-frame) contracting dimensions, the other dimensions may keep expanding
(and accelerated) in both frames.
    Consider, for instance, the S-frame vacuum solutions (2.22), corresponding to d expand-
ing and n contracting dimensions. When expressed in terms of the E-frame metric ge, and
in the cosmic time gauge, through the transformation
                                                                                   1/2
                                                                              2
      geµν = gµν e−2φ/(d+n−1) ,   dte = dt e−φ/(d+n−1) ,       φe = φ                      (2.113)
                                                                            d+n−1
(which generalizes to the anisotropic case the transformations of Eqs. (1.8), (1.11)), the
solution becomes
                                       √                                      √
                           − √ 2n−1− d+n                   √ 2d−1+ d+n
                   a e = −te
                   e(t)         d+n(d+n)+d−n
                                             ,       e e = −te d+n(d+n)+d−n ,
                                                     b(t)
                                   1/2           √
                   e t)
                      e =     2          (n −  d −  d + n)(d + n − 1)     e
                   φ(                        √                        ln(−t).              (2.114)
                               d+n−1            d + n(d + n) + d − n

                                                                            ė > 0, a
The expanding part of the solution thus remains expanding (and inflationary a       ë > 0)
                                          √
even in the E-frame, provided 2n > 1 + d + n. Note that, for d = 3, this condition is
                                                         √
compatible with the condition of growing dilaton, n < d + d + n, only for n = 1.
    However, isotropic (n = 0) metrics in the E-frame are contracting. This does not
represent a difficulty for the pre-big bang scenario because the contraction is accelerated,
a       a < 0, and thus corresponds to a phase in which the ratio r decreases in time, as
ė < 0, ë
required for the solution of the horizon/flatness problems (see Sections 1.3 and 2.4). In
particular, if the phase of accelerated expansion is long enough to solve the problems in the
S-frame, according to Eq. (2.108), then the problems are also solved in the E-frame [320],
since the conformal time is the same in both:
                                            dte    dt
                                   dηe =        =      = dη.                               (2.115)
                                              e
                                           a(t)
                                           e      a(t)

                                               44
Furthermore, as we will see in Section 4.1, the spectral distribution of the metric fluctuations
amplified by inflation is also the same in both frames [320, 321].
    Such a frame independence of the inflationary aspects of the pre-big bang solutions also
extends to the string-driven (and, more generally, matter-dominated) solutions presented
in the previous subsection.
    Suppose, in fact, that we start, at some initial time ti , with a distribution of strings
characterized in the S-frame by a packing factor (average distance/average size) of the order
of unity, and with sufficiently small interactions to represent a perfect fluid source for the
superinflationary solution (2.38), (2.39), with γ = −1/d. In the S-frame, where the metric
a is expanding, the perfect-fluid approximation is also valid at any subsequent time t > ti ,
as the number of strings per unit of string volume n(t) is diluted in time by the factor
n/ni = (ai /a)d < 1. In the E-frame the metric a e is contracting, but the string’s proper size
e                           e
L(t) shrinks with time as L = (a/a)λs . As a consequence, the number of strings per unit of
                                 e
string volume scales as n         e s )d a
                         e (t) = (L/λ    e−d = a−d , and it is again diluted as time goes on,
exactly by the same amount as in the S-frame [321].
    With similar arguments it can be shown that the heating up of the string gas with
respect to the radiation, which is easy to understand in the S-frame where the metric is
expanding and the radiation is redshifted, also occurs in the E-frame, in spite of the fact
that the radiation is blueshifted because of the contraction [320].
    Using the standard thermodynamical arguments (see for instance [618]) we find indeed,
for the perfect-fluid sources with p/ρ = γ, generating the solution (2.38), that their tem-
perature Tγ satisfies Tγ ∼ a−dγ . On the other hand, ργ ∼ a−d(1+γ) . In the S-frame the
radiation (γ = 1/d) is thus supercooled and diluted with respect to the (string) sources that
drive inflation (γ < 1/d),
                                     Tγ    ργ
                                        =     ∼ a1−dγ ,                               (2.116)
                                     Tr    ρr
since the metric is expanding.
   In the E-frame the fluid sources satisfy a modified conservation equation,

                                 e ρe + pe) − p 1
                          ρė + dH(                     ė ρe − dpe) = 0
                                                        φ(                              (2.117)
                                               2(d − 1)

                                             e obtained from Eq. (2.31), with ρe defined
(the dots refer to the E-frame cosmic time t),
in Eq. (2.96). The radiation, which has a traceless stress tensor, still evolves adiabati-
cally, but now its temperature is blueshifted because of the contraction: Ter ∼ a
                                                                                e−1 . The
effective temperature of the other matter sources is also blueshifted, however, and using
thermodynamical arguments we obtain [320], from Eq. (2.117):

                                 Teγ       ρeγ
                                       =        eγ(d−1)(dγ−1)/(γ−1) .
                                               ∼a                                       (2.118)
                                 Ter       ρer


                                                   45
    For the sources of the inflationary S-frame expansion we have γ < 0, so that even in the
E-frame the above ratio is growing, with a corresponding cooling down and dilution of the
radiation density (with respect to the density of the inflationary sources).
    There is thus a complete frame-independence for the physical effects of the inflationary
solutions of the pre-big bang scenario. This can also be understood as an invariance of
physics under a local field redefinition. Different frames are just related by a local (field-
dependent) conformal transformation of the metric. No physical observables should depend
on it, and this is what we shall find whenever we push a calculation to its very end (see also
[19] for a recent discussion of this point). Further help is provided by the fact that, at late
times, when the dilaton is frozen, all frames actually coincide.
    Yet it is true that, in developing some physical intuition, there are important kinematical
differences in different frames, as also stressed by the examples illustrated before. Inflation
in the S-frame, for instance, can be represented as gravitational collapse in the E-frame
(see the next section). We think that the S-frame (whose metric coincides with the sigma-
model metric to which fundamental strings are directly coupled, see Section 2.2) is the one
offering the simplest intuitive picture of how things evolve and work. The following three
main points support this attitude.
    The first point concerns the ultraviolet cut-off. The string metric is the one in which
the ultraviolet cut-off of string theory is kept fixed, i.e. does not depend on the dilaton (at
least in perturbation theory). This can be easily seen from the form of the tree-level action
in the S-frame, in d = 3, in which we include a typical higher-derivative correction, α′ R2 :
                                   Z          q                                
                      SF      1
                  Γ        =− 2        d4 x      |g| e−φ R + gµν ∂µ φ∂ν φ + α′ R2 .    (2.119)
                             2λs

Obviously, higher-derivative corrections become relevant, in this frame, as soon as R ∼ λ−2
                                                                                         s
and independently of φ. By contrast, the equivalent E-frame action would read:
                                  Z          q                                  
                     EF      1          4            e  1 µν            ′ −φ e 2
                 Γ        =− 2         d x    |ge|   R − ge ∂µ φ∂ν φ + α e R .         (2.120)
                            2λs                                   2

                                                                 e ∼ λ−2 eφ , which is again
indicating that higher-derivative corrections become relevant at R    s
the (dilaton-dependent) string scale expressed in Planck units.
   The second point concerns masses. Tree-level string masses are dilaton-independent in
the S-frame, but depend on φ in the E-frame since the S-frame relation g µν pµ pν = m2
becomes geµν pµ pν = m2 eφ in the E-frame.
    The third point concerns couplings. It is only an illusion that, by going to the E-frame,
we make the Newton constant GN dilaton-independent. The physical quantity is not so
much Newton’s constant but the gravitational force, say between two heavy strings. The
force will be proportional to GN m1 m2 . In the S-frame, masses are dilaton-independent
and GN ∼ eφ , while, in the E-frame, GN is fixed but all masses scale like eφ/2 . The same


                                                         46
physical result is obtained for the gravitational force but, clearly, it is much more economical
to attribute the dilaton dependence of Newton’s force to Newton’s constant rather than to
a universal dilaton dependence of all masses. We think that this is a good example of how
physics is frame-independent, while our own physical intuition may prefer one frame to the
other.
    For all these reasons we shall interpret our results mainly in the string frame. Nonethe-
less, we shall often use other frames at intermediate stages of the calculation, to make it as
simple as possible.


3    Initial conditions

We have already mentioned that, in standard non-inflationary cosmology, initial conditions
have to be fine-tuned to an incredible accuracy in the far past (i.e. at t ∼ tP ∼ 10−43 s),
or else it is impossible to explain some of the most striking properties of today’s Universe,
such as its homogeneity and flatness.
     In the pre-big bang scenario, having extended time to the past of the big bang event can
certainly help solving the fine-tuning problems of standard cosmology: after all, most of
these come from a “shortage of time” for things to happen early on after the big bang. Yet
it is important to discuss the conditions under which a pre-big bang phase can naturally
generate a patch that can evolve into the Universe we live in. In other words: What does
the fine-tuning problem look like if, accepting hints from scale-factor duality, we assume
perturbative, yet generic, initial conditions?
     In this section we shall address this kind of questions by considering, for simplicity, a class
of space-times endowed with a regular (time-like and null) asymptotic past, and by imposing
on these geometries a condition of asymptotic-past-triviality (APT) (see Subsection 3.2).
We are aware of the fact that this is already a schematization of a more general set-up
where one would simply assume that the Universe, almost everywhere and almost all the
time, is in a chaotic, highly entropic perturbative state in which the arrow of time itself is
ill-defined. Within such a more general set-up a mechanism for generating a low-entropy
subsystem has to be found, so that, within this subsystem, a time arrow (the direction of
increasing entropy) can possibly be identified, and the organized Universe we happen to be
living in can develop.
    We shall argue in Subsection 3.3 that such a mechanism can be identified in the well-
known phenomenon of gravitational collapse, and that the low-entropy region corresponding
to our own Universe lies in the interior of the closed trapped surface that emerged from the
collapse. We shall illustrate in Subsection 3.4 the particular cases of spherical and planar
symmetry, comment on the problem of chaotic oscillations in Subsection 3.5, and finally
present our conclusion on the fine-tuning problem in Subsection 3.6.


                                                47
    In our simplified approach we will treat one of these regions as representing, by itself,
the full space-time manifold. Such a simplifying procedure is by no means new in general
relativity: asymptotic flatness (asymptotic spatial triviality, in our terminology) is often
assumed in order to prove rigorous theorems. Yet, causality guarantees that the collapse of
a star within our galaxy can only depend on local conditions, and this allows for a simplified
treatment of the problem.
    In a similar spirit we shall assume that the dynamics that gave rise to our Universe can
be approximately described by a space-time with an asymptotically trivial past. Thanks
to gravitational instability, this evolved towards the formation of a closed trapped surface
and of a space-like singularity of the big bang type. Assuming that the actual singularity is
avoided, thanks to string corrections to general relativity, this process may give rise, even-
tually, to a (post-big bang) phase resembling the one of standard hot big bang cosmology.
    In the next subsection, to approach the question of whether our present Universe may
arise from generic initial conditions, we will relax the homogeneity assumption adopted in
Section 2 and consider more general solutions of the string cosmology equations.


3.1   Quasi-homogeneous and inhomogeneous solutions

If we want to explain the large-scale homogeneity and isotropy of our Universe out of a cos-
mological phase preceding the big bang, we have to consider the case of non-homogeneous
cosmologies with the hope to find homogeneity, isotropy, and flatness as asymptotic features
of late-time attractors. The question, in particular, is how to obtain space-time manifolds
where spatial gradients are subdominant with respect to time derivatives, starting from
initial conditions in which they are of the same order. In a rather commonly used ter-
minology, we would like to see “velocity-dominated” cosmologies emerge, at late times,
from non-velocity-dominated initial conditions. This is what ordinary, slow-roll inflation
supposedly does.
    If we start from very generic inhomogeneous conditions, it is conceivable that, as in the
case of chaotic inflation [439], only some spatial patches will end up exhibiting the required
homogeneity and flatness to be consistent with our Universe, while inhomogeneity and
anisotropy will prevail almost everywhere else. In the context of such a type of background
evolution it is clear that, as a necessary preparatory exercise, we need to understand the
nature of solutions that are not too inhomogeneous, leaving momentarily aside the problem
of showing how patches of this kind may emerge at late times.
   Such a program was started in [603] and further extended in [134]. The analysis per-
formed in [603] was based on the general equations for the gravidilaton system in D = 4,
together with the assumption of regularity at past infinity. It was shown that, on a constant-
time hypersurface (defined in the synchronous gauge), sufficiently isotropic initial patches
with ∇g ∼ ġ and with a growing dilaton would inevitably expand, in the S-frame, and evolve


                                             48
towards homogeneity and strong coupling. Within those patches, a reliable expansion in
spatial gradients [75] can be justified, the evolution quickly becomes velocity-dominated,
and a Kasner-like singularity is approached according to the following generalization of the
solution (2.88), (2.89):
                                    X
                    ds2 = dt2 −          eai (x) eaj (x) (−t)2αa (x) dxi dxj ,
                                     a
                         "                  #
                          X                                         X
                    φ=           αi (x) − 1 log(−t),           1=         α2i (x) ,         t<0.            (3.1)
                             i                                        i


    If the above equations represented a general quasi-homogeneous solution, the Z2d gener-
alization of scale-factor duality would be explicitly respected in the form αi (x) → −αi (x)
(for any subset of indices i), while keeping all eai (x) and φ̄ fixed. However, the momentum
constraints still have to be imposed on Eq. (3.1): they are trivial in the homogeneous case,
but quite non-trivial in the presence of spatial gradients. These constraints preserve the
simplest scale-factor duality [αi (x) → −αi (x) for all i], but explicitly break its Z2d general-
ization [134]. The full symmetry is expected to be recovered as the solution approaches the
singularity.
    The (S-frame) local expansion rate, for the above metric, is given by the trace Θ of the
volume expansion tensor Θµν [615],
                                                                                 P
                                                                                      i αi (x)
   Θµν = hαµ hβν ∇(α nβ) ,       hµν = gµν − nµ nν ,                µν
                                                            Θ ≡ h Θµν =                          , t < 0,   (3.2)
                                                                                        t
where nµ is the unit time-like vector normal to the (space-like) homogeneity hypersurfaces.
Under the Kasner constraint of Eq. (3.1), it is clear that the maximal rate of expansion
is reached where all αi are equal and negative [603]. Hence the most isotropic patches are
inflated most during this Kasner-like phase, suggesting that most of the space becomes
fairly homogeneous and isotropic. This is true in spite of the fact that, unlike in ordinary
inflation, the modulus σ 2 of the shear tensor [615],
                              1                                       1
                         σ 2 = σµν σ µν ,                  σµν = Θµν − Θhµν                                 (3.3)
                              2                                       3
is not washed away as a Kasner-like singularity is approached [424] (unless higher-order
corrections play an important role in this respect [333]).
    In a subsequent work [134] these arguments were generalized in several directions. First,
the equations were extended to an arbitrary number of dimensions, showing that in D 6= 4
no qualitatively new results emerge: in particular there is no critical value of D below
which the phenomenon of BKL oscillations (to be described in Subsection 3.5) takes place.
Secondly, quasi-homogeneous solutions were constructed with the inclusion of the NS-NS
two-form Bµν : again, they look very similar to the known homogeneous solutions, provided
the exponents are allowed to depend on space. The only non-trivial point consists, again,
in imposing the momentum constraints that explicitly break O(d, d) symmetry.

                                                      49
    The case of a quasi-homogeneous axion field in D = 4 was also considered in [134].
Since the axion and Bµν are related by a (Poincaré) duality transformation that mixes
space and time, this case is genuinely different from the one discussed above. Actually,
the case of a homogeneous axion shows interesting new features, such as the blowing up of
the dilaton both at very late and at very early times. These results, however, have to be
taken with much precaution since some of the approximations may break down before such
strong-coupling regimes are entered.
    In [134] a conjecture was made that, as one approaches past infinity, there is a wide basin
of attraction towards a trivial Milne geometry, which is nothing but a wedge of empty,
flat Minkowski space in convenient coordinates. If this conjecture were true, we would
conclude that the asymptotic past of pre-big bang cosmology is indeed trivial. However,
the conjecture was proved not to be quite correct [167, 423], through the construction of
exact inhomogeneous solutions of various kinds. Only some of them exhibit a Milne-like
behaviour at very early times, while, more often than not, the asymptotic past consists of
weakly interacting waves, endowed with the symmetries of the solutions, travelling on top
of a trivial background [167, 423, 629]. Examples of this kind were constructed by various
techniques.
    In the case of cylindrical symmetry, exact, non-homogeneous and anisotropic solutions,
containing both a dilaton and an axion fields, were already discussed in [61]. Up to a
trivial time-reversal transformation, those solutions approach, near the late-time, a special
case of the background (3.1), while, at very early times, an oscillatory behaviour prevails.
The authors of [61] have also discussed symmetry properties of the solutions under O(d, d)
duality transformations.
    Inhomogeneous, cylindrical backgrounds for the bosonic massless modes of heterotic and
type-IIB superstrings have also been obtained [247] by applying T - and S-duality transfor-
mations (as well as the usual Geroch transformations) to vacuum solutions of the Einstein
equations exhibiting a two-dimensional group (G2 ) of Abelian isometries. The inhomoge-
neous, string theory version of the Mixmaster (Bianchi-IX-type) cosmology, in particular,
has been presented in [247]. Other inhomogeneous Einstein–Rosen string cosmologies were
studied with a similar technique in [167], by applying the global duality symmetries of
the superstring effective action to homogeneous models of Bianchi-V Ih -type. Again, in
these solutions, the conjecture of an asymptotic-past Milne metric is not usually satisfied.
New inhomogeneous string cosmologies were also obtained in [436] by applying a discrete
(mirror-like) symmetry of the string effective action to D = 4 to vacuum solutions of general
relativity.
    On a more phenomenological ground, an interesting model containing a spherically sym-
metric inhomogeneity was studied at the non-perturbative level in [62]. Such a treatment
allows the investigation of primordial black hole formation in string cosmology, an issue
that we shall reconsider in the context of tensor perturbations in Section 5 (see also [437]).


                                              50
The question of how robust the existence of inflationary solutions is, in the presence of
various axion-like backgrounds, was addressed in [248]; it was shown that in some cases the
parameter space leading to inflation shrinks down to the empty set. Such a phenomenon
may well be related to the generic existence of chaos and BKL oscillations, which will be
discussed later, in Subsection 3.5.
    The question of the asymptotic-past behaviour of inhomogeneous string cosmology was
addressed in general in [423] within G2 space-times, admitting two Abelian space-like Killing
vectors. Once more, the asymptotic past, rather than empty and Milne-like, was found to
contain weakly interacting waves. The inclusion of a Maxwell field was finally considered
in [629]: even in this case, while the behaviour near the singularity is Kasner-like, the
asymptotic past is filled with weakly interacting gravitational, dilatonic, and electromag-
netic waves.
    As a general remark all these special, exact, non-homogeneous solutions (and general,
quasi-homogeneous solutions) can shed important light on the evolution of perturbations
discussed in Sections 4–7, in particular when perturbation theory becomes inadequate. We
shall occasionally make use of this connection later in this report. The conclusion that we
wish to draw, for the time being, is that a simple structure in the asymptotic past (although
not necessarily as trivial as Milne’s) can be consistently assumed for the generic solution.
This suggests to replace the assumption of past regularity by a somewhat stronger postulate,
that of asymptotic past triviality. Such a concept will be introduced and developed in the
rest of this section.


3.2   Asymptotic past triviality and symmetries

We start from the general postulate that the pre-collapse, pre-big bang evolution of the
Universe can be described in terms of the low-energy, tree-level action of string theory.
Taking a generic closed superstring theory, this reads (see Section 2):
                        Z            q                                        
               1                                                   1
          S = − λ1−d        dd+1 x   |g| e−φ R + gµν ∂µ φ∂ν φ −      (dB)2 − 2 Λ   ,     (3.4)
               2 s                                                12

where dB is the (three-form) field strength associated with the antisymmetric tensor Bµν .
A further simplification comes from assuming that we are dealing with so-called critical
superstring theory, the case in which the tree-level (and actually the all-order-perturbative)
cosmological constant Λ vanishes. This requires a total of D = 10 space-time dimensions
[346]. If D 6= 10 there will indeed be an effective cosmological constant O(λ−2s ) preventing
the existence of any low-curvature solution of the field equations.
    Equation (3.4) receives corrections either when curvatures become O(λ−2
                                                                         s ), or when the
           φ
coupling e becomes O(1). If such corrections are both negligible, it sometimes becomes
useful to perform a change of variable by going to the E-frame, already introduced in the



                                                51
previous sections. In general, this is done by defining [575, 615]:
                                                            2
                                          gµν = geµν e d−1 (φ−φ0 ) .                       (3.5)

Using the Einstein metric ge (and dropping the tilde), the result for the action (3.4) is simply:
                        Z             q                                             
               1                                         1             1    4
          S = − λ1−d        d+1
                            d     x   |g(E) |        R−     ∂µ φ∂ µ φ − e− d−1 φ (dB)2 ,   (3.6)
               2 P                                      d−1            12

where λd−1
        P   = eφ0 λd−1
                   s   is the present value of the Planck length, if we take φ0 to coincide
with the present (constant) value of the dilaton.
    Although the use of the E-frame could simplify some calculations, and we shall see ex-
amples of this below, it should be kept in mind that the form of the corrections is no longer
so simple. For instance, as already stressed at the end of Section 2, higher-derivative cor-
                                                                       2
                                                                          φ
rections become important when the E-frame curvature is O(λ−2     P e
                                                                      d−1   = λ−2
                                                                               s ), i.e. when it
reaches a dilaton-dependent critical value. Similarly, having a constant Newton “constant”
in this frame is a mere illusion, because (even tree-level) string masses now depend upon φ
(as already illustrated in Subsection 2.5). For these reasons, although physical results are
frame-independent, we shall always describe them with reference to the original S-frame
metric in which the string length λs is constant.
    Let us finally remark that the two frames coincide today if the dilaton is eventually
fixed at its present value φ0 . Similarly, as we shall see, the assumption of APT leads to
a very large and negative value of the initial dilaton which, if finite, would also allow the
identification of the two frames in the far past. However, the two E-frames that coincide
with the S-frame at t = ±∞ differ from each other by an enormous conformal factor, i.e.
by a huge blowing-up of all physical scales.
    The classical equations that follow from varying (3.4) or (3.6), besides being generally
covariant, are also invariant under a two-parameter group of (global) transformations acting
as follows:
                            φ → φ + c,              gµν → λ2 gµν ,                     (3.7)
where λ and c are constant parameters (using general covariance, the latter symmetry is
also equivalent to an overall rescaling of all the coordinates). Indeed, both actions are
simply rescaled by a constant factor under this group. Note that these two symmetries
depend crucially on the validity of the tree-level, low-energy approximation, and on the
absence of a cosmological constant. Loop corrections clearly spoil invariance under dilaton
shifts, while lower-derivatives (a cosmological constant) or higher-derivatives (α′ ) corrections
spoil invariance under a rescaling of the metric. The importance of dealing with critical
superstring theory now becomes evident: if wewould consider non-supersymmetric string
theories, a cosmological constant would almost certainly be generated at some finite order
of the loop expansion, which would change completely the large-distance properties and
would spoil the symmetries of the field equations.

                                                       52
    The immediate consequence of the above two symmetries is that solutions of the field
equations depend on two free parameters, a dimensionless one related to the overall value
of φ, and a dimensionful one corresponding to an overall length scale. As a consequence,
neither the value of the fundamental string length nor that of the Planck length are of
relevance to the classical solutions. The importance of this point on the issue of fine-tuning
will become clear later in this section.
     Only if (and when) the solutions are driven into the high-curvature regime will higher-
derivative corrections (involving the string length) will become relevant and break scale
invariance. The analysis presented in this section can only be trusted up to this point, or
until the strong coupling regime is reached. Which of the two limitations will be reached
first depends, in turn, on the two above-mentioned classical moduli. For sufficiently small
initial coupling the high-curvature regime is encountered first, while, for sufficiently small
initial curvature, the opposite is true. Both possibilities will be discussed in the last part
of this report (see Section 8).
    As already mentioned, the way we now introduce (and exploit) the concept of APT
in string cosmology parallels the familiar use of “asymptotic flatness” in general relativ-
ity [93, 545, 513]. In both cases some assumption of asymptotic simplicity is made, the
asymptotic past in our case, spatial infinity in the more familiar case. It seems indeed
physically (and philosophically) satisfactory to identify the beginning with simplicity. How-
ever, simplicity should not be confused with complete triviality: a rigorously empty and
flat Universe, besides being uninteresting, is also very special, i.e. non-generic. By con-
trast, asymptotically trivial Universes, though initially simple, are also generic in a precise
mathematical sense that we shall now discuss.
     In the weak-coupling, small-curvature, low-energy regime under consideration, all heavy
string modes can be integrated out, and one is left with an effective theory of the massless
fields. Some of these fields, the graviton, the dilaton, and the NS-NS two-form, are always
present. Others (e.g. gauge fields and higher-order forms) may vary, depending on the
particular superstring theory under study or, in an M-theory perspective, on the particular
M-theory vacuum around which the generic solution is looked for.
     For the moment, let us restrict our attention to those three universal massless fields
whose low-energy small-coupling dynamics is controlled by the effective action (3.4). The
general solution of the field equations, in this regime, will consist of an arbitrary linear su-
perposition of (long-wavelength) gravitational, dilatonic and axionic waves. From the point
of view of target space (taken here, for the sake of illustration, to be (3 + 1)-dimensional),
the generic solution depends upon four arbitrary functions of three coordinates [425] related
to the metric, plus two more each for the dilaton and for the axion field associated to Bµν .
We will now see how these arbitrary functions appear in the asymptotic expansion of our
fields.
   Let us assume, in accordance with APT, the existence, in the far past, of Bondi–Sachs-


                                              53
like coordinates r, v, θ, ϕ in which our fields, as r → ∞, take the asymptotic forms [93, 545]
                                              fµν (v, θ, ϕ)
                                gµν = ηµν +                 + ... ,                       (3.8)
                                                    r
and let us count the number of arbitrary functions needed to specify our initial data up to
gauge transformations. This problem has been widely discussed in the general relativistic
literature and the result (up to functions of less than three coordinates) is the one we have
mentioned: a total of 4+2+2 = 8 functions of three coordinates are needed (see for instance
[425]).
    Interestingly, there is an exact correspondence between this “target-space” counting and
a “world-sheet” counting. In the latter, those eight arbitrary functions correspond to eight
arbitrary functions of three-momentum entering the most general physical (i.e. on shell)
vertex operator describing gravitons, dilatons, and the antisymmetric tensor field (which,
in four dimensions, is equivalent to a pseudoscalar, also called Kalb–Ramond axion). It
is amusing to compare this number with that of marginal operators, able to deform the
trivial conformal field theory on a flat target space into another conformal theory. These
are associated with physical vertex operators for the graviton, the dilaton and the NS-NS
two-form (see for instance [346]). It is easy to verify that such (1,1) vertex operators depend
on the same number of arbitrary functions as our APT data.
    For instance, a physical graviton is associated with a vertex operator depending on two
physical-polarization vectors, each of which depends arbitrarily upon the three-momentum
of the on-shell graviton [346]:
                         i
                       Vgrav                 ¯ ν eik·X ,
                             = ǫi (k)µν ∂X µ ∂X                       i = 1, 2.           (3.9)

Similar considerations apply to the dilaton and two-form vertex operators. They lead to a
total number of eight functions of space, needed to define the most general deformation of
the conformal field theory around its flat space-time limit.
    From this point of view we see that APT conditions are generic, in a technical sense.
Yet APT is not a general property of initial conditions. For instance, it looks as if, by
choosing APT, we have eliminated the possibility of “white holes”, objects that can emit
but not absorb matter and that could possibly violate the second law of thermodynamics.
In a sense, by our APT postulate, we are enforcing the second law, at least in that part of
space-time that will give rise to our Universe.


3.3   Pre-big bang inflation as gravitational collapse

For simplicity, we will only illustrate here the simplest case of gravidilaton system already
compactified to four space-time dimensions. Through the field redefinition (3.5), our prob-
lem is reduced to the study of a massless scalar field minimally coupled to gravity. It is
well known that such a form of matter cannot give inflation (since it has positive pressure).

                                               54
Instead, it can easily lead to gravitational collapse. Thus, in the E-frame, the problem
becomes that of finding out under which conditions gravitational collapse occurs, if asymp-
totically trivial initial data are assigned. Gravitational collapse usually means that the
(Einstein) metric (hence the volume of 3-space) shrinks to zero at a space-like singularity.
However, typically, the dilaton blows up at that same singularity. Given the relation (3.5)
between the Einstein and the (physical) string metric, we can easily imagine that the latter
blows up near the singularity, as implied by the phase of dilaton-driven inflation illustrated
in Section 2.
    How generically does a gravitational collapse take place? Let us recall the singularity
theorems of Hawking and Penrose [514, 372], which state that, under some general assump-
tions, singularities are inescapable in general relativity. Looking at the validity of those
assumptions in the case at hand, one finds that all but one are automatically satisfied. The
only condition to be imposed is the existence of a closed trapped surface (a closed surface
from which future-directed light rays converge). Rigorous results [163] show that this condi-
tion cannot be waived: sufficiently weak initial data do not lead to closed trapped surfaces,
to collapse, or to singularities. Sufficiently strong initial data do. But where is the border-
line? This is not known in general, but precise criteria do exist for particularly symmetric
space-times, e.g. for those endowed with spherical or plane symmetry (see Subsection 3.4).
   However, no matter what the general collapse/singularity criterion will eventually turn
out to be, we do know, from the classical symmetries described in the previous subsection,
that such a criterion cannot depend either on an overall additive constant in φ, or on an
overall multiplicative factor in gµν .
   A characterization of APT initial data can be made [129] following the pioneering work
of Bondi, Sachs, Penrose, and others. Since our initial quanta are assumed to consist of
massless gravitons and dilatons, their past infinity is null: it is the so-called I − boundary of
the Penrose diagram (see Fig. 3.1). APT means that dilaton and metric can be expanded
near I − in inverse powers of r → ∞, while advanced time v and two angular variables, θ
and ϕ, are kept fixed. We shall thus write:
                                                             
                                               f (v, θ, ϕ)    1
                             φ(xλ ) = φ0 +                 +O     ,                       (3.10)
                                                    r         r
                                                               
                                               fµν (v, θ, ϕ)    1
                           gµν (xλ ) = ηµν +                 +O       .                   (3.11)
                                                     r          r
The null wave data on I − are: the asymptotic dilatonic waveform f (v, θ, ϕ), and two polar-
ization components, f+ (v, θ, ϕ) and f× (v, θ, ϕ), of the asymptotic gravitational waveform
fµν (v, θ, ϕ), whose other components can be gauged away. The three functions f , f+ , f×
of v, θ, ϕ are equivalent to six functions of r, θ, ϕ with r ≥ 0, because the advanced time v
ranges over the full line (−∞, +∞). This is how the six arbitrary functions of the generic
solution to the gravidilaton system are recovered.



                                                 55
                                                        I+




                                        post-big bang
                                                             today    I+
                            time



                                                                                       I0
                                   big bang                                                 space




                                       pre-big bang
                                                                      I-

                                                                           ATP data given here

                                                        I-




 Figure 3.1: Penrose diagram for a possible model of complete string-cosmology scenario.

   Of particular interest here are the so-called News functions, simply given by

                N (v, θ, ϕ) ≡ ∂v f (v, θ, ϕ),                        N+ ≡ ∂v f+ ,                N× ≡ ∂v f× ,        (3.12)

and the “Bondi mass” given by:
                     Z                                                                                       
                 1                                                                 2M− (v, θ, ϕ)               1
     M− (v) =            d2 ΩM− (v, θ, ϕ),                       gvv = − 1 −                             +O      .   (3.13)
                4π                                                                      r                      r
The Bondi mass and the News are connected by the energy–momentum conservation equa-
tion, which tells us that the advanced-time derivative of M− (v) is positive-semidefinite, and
related to incoming energy fluxes controlled by the News:
                                                             Z                               
                             dM− (v)   1
                                     =                           d2 Ω N 2 + N+2 + N×2 .                              (3.14)
                               dv      4

    The physical meaning of M− (v) is that it represents the energy brought into the system
(by massless sources) by advanced time v. In the same spirit, one can define the Bondi
mass M+ (u) at future null infinity I + . It represents the energy still present in the system
at retarded time u. If only massless sources are present, the so-called ADM mass is given
by
                             M− (+∞) = M+ (−∞) = MADM ,                                  (3.15)
while M− (−∞) = 0, and M+ (+∞) = MC represents the mass that has not been radiated
away even after waiting an infinite time, i.e. the mass that underwent gravitational collapse
[164]. Collapse (resp. no-collapse) criteria thus aim at establishing under which initial
conditions one expects to find MC > 0 (resp. MC = 0).

                                                                     56
    Since, as we shall see in the particular case of spherical and planar symmetry, collapse
criteria i) do not involve any particularly large number, and ii) do not contain any intrinsic
scale, but just dimensionless ratios of various classical scales, we expect:

   • Gravitational collapse to be quite a generic phenomenon.

   • Nothing to be there to fix either the size of the horizon or the value of φ at the onset
     of collapse.

Generically, randomly, chaotically, some regions of space at some moment in time will
undergo gravitational collapse and will form horizons and singularities therein. When this
is translated into the S-frame, regions of space-time within the horizon actually undergo a
period of inflation in which the initial values of both the Hubble parameter and φ are left
arbitrary. In Subsection 3.6 we shall see that such an arbitrariness provides an answer to
the fine-tuning allegations that have been moved [588, 394] to the pre-big bang scenario.
Before dealing with that issue, however, we shall discuss in the following two subsections
cases endowed with special isometries, for which much more is known than for the general
case.


3.4   The case of spherical and planar symmetry

In the spherically symmetric case, many authors have studied the problem of gravitational
collapse of a minimally coupled scalar field, both numerically and analytically. In the
former case we should recall the existence of well-known results [161] pointing at mysterious
universalities near critical collapse (i.e. at the borderline situation in which the collapse
criteria are just barely met). In this case, a very small black hole forms. This is not the case
we are really interested in, for the reasons we just explained. We shall thus turn, instead,
to what happens when the collapse criteria are largely fulfilled. For this we make use of the
classical results presented in [163, 164, 165, 166].
    In the case of spherical symmetry there are no gravitational waves, so that null wave
data consist of just an angle-independent, asymptotic dilatonic waveform f (v), with the
associated scalar News N (v) = f ′ (v). A convenient system of coordinates is the double null
system (u, v), such that

                   φ = φ(u, v) ,     ds2 = −Ω2 (u, v) du dv + r 2 (u, v) dω 2 ,          (3.16)

where dω 2 = dθ 2 + sin2 θ dϕ2 . The field equations are conveniently re-expressed in terms
of the three functions φ(u, v), r(u, v) and m(u, v), where the local mass function m(u, v) is
defined by:
                              2m                            4 ∂r ∂r
                         1−        ≡ g µν (∂µ r) (∂ν r) = − 2       .                 (3.17)
                                r                          Ω ∂u ∂v


                                               57
One then gets the following set of evolution equations for m, r and φ:
                                                2                                     2
              ∂r ∂m        2m r 2             ∂φ         ∂r ∂m        2m r 2            ∂φ
            2       = 1−                            ,  2       = 1−                               (3.18)
              ∂u ∂u         r   4             ∂u         ∂v ∂v         r    4           ∂v
                2
               ∂ r     2m ∂r ∂r                   2
                                                 ∂ φ    ∂r ∂φ ∂r ∂φ
            r      =              ,           r       +        +       = 0.                       (3.19)
              ∂u∂v   r − 2m ∂u ∂v               ∂u∂v ∂u ∂v       ∂v ∂u

   The quantity
                                                  2m(u, v)
                                      µ(u, v) ≡                                            (3.20)
                                                      r
plays a crucial rôle in the problem. If µ stays everywhere below 1, the field configuration will
not collapse but will finally disperse at infinity as outgoing waves. By contrast, if the mass
ratio µ can reach anywhere the value 1, this signals the formation of an apparent horizon
A (a closed trapped surface), whose location is indeed defined by the equation µ(u, v) = 1.
The above statements are substantiated by some rigorous inequalities [166], stating that:
             ∂r             ∂m                ∂r                       ∂m
                < 0,           > 0,              (1 − µ) > 0 ,            (1 − µ) < 0 .           (3.21)
             ∂u             ∂v                ∂v                       ∂u
Thus, in weak-field regions (µ < 1), we have ∂v r > 0, while, as µ > 1, we have ∂v r < 0,
meaning that the outgoing radial null rays (“photons”) emitted by the sphere r = const be-
come convergent, instead of having their usual behaviour. This is nothing but the signature
of a closed trapped surface.
    The emergence of a closed trapped surface implies the existence of a future singular
boundary B of space-time where a curvature singularity occurs [371, 165]. Furthermore,
the behaviour of various fields near the singularity is just that of a quasi-homogeneous
phase of dilaton-driven inflation as described by Eqs. (3.1). This highly non-trivial result
strongly supports the idea that pre-big bang inflation in the S-frame is the counterpart of
gravitational collapse in the E-frame.
   Reference [165] gives the following sufficient criterion on the strength of characteristic
data, considered at some finite retarded time u
                                                                   
                            2∆m   r1      r1                     6r1
                                ≥    log                     +       −1 ,                         (3.22)
                             ∆r   r2     2∆r                     r2
where r1 and r2 define two spheres, such that r1 ≤ r2 and r2 ≤ 3r1 /2, , ∆r = r2 − r1
is the width of the “annular” region between the two spheres, and ∆m = m2 − m1 ≡
m(u, r2 ) − m(u, r1 ) is the mass “contained” between the two spheres, i.e. more precisely the
energy flux through the outgoing null cone u = const, between r1 and r2 . Note the absence
of any intrinsic scale (in particular of any short-distance cut-off) in the above criterion.
The theorem proved in [165] is not exhausted in the above statement. It contains various
bounds as well, in particular: i) an upper bound on the retarded time at which the closed
trapped surgace (i.e. a horizon) is formed, ii) a lower bound on the mass, i.e. on the radius
of the collapsing region.

                                                    58
    The latter quantity is very important for the discussion of the previous subsection since
it gives, in the equivalent S-frame problem, an upper limit on the Hubble parameter at the
beginning of the phase of inflation. Such an upper limit depends only on the size of the
advanced-time interval satisfying the collapse criterion; since the latter is determined by the
scale-invariant condition (3.22), the initial scale of inflation will be classically undetermined.
    The above criterion is rigorous, but probably too conservative. It also has the short-
coming that it cannot be used directly on I − , since u → −∞ on I − . In Ref. [129] a less
rigorous (or less general) but simpler criterion, directly expressible in terms of the News (i.e.
on I − ), was proposed on the basis of a perturbative study. It has the following attractive
form:
                            sup Var(N (x))x∈[v1 ,v2 ] > C = O(1/4) ,                      (3.23)
                                v1 ,v2
                                v1 ≤v2

where:
                         Var (N (x))x∈[v1 ,v2 ] ≡ h(N (x) − hN i[v1 ,v2 ] )2 ix∈[v1 ,v2 ] .            (3.24)
Thus Var (g)[v1 ,v2 ] denotes the “variance” of the function g(x) over the interval [v1 , v2 ], i.e.
the average squared deviation from its mean value.
    According to this criterion the largest interval satisfying (3.23) determines the size of
the collapsing region and thus, through the collapse inflation connection, the initial value of
the Hubble parameter. It would be interesting to confirm the validity of the above criterion,
and to determine more precisely the value of the constant appearing on its r.h.s., through
more analytic or numerical work. This problem has been studied by two perturbative nu-
merical analyses [468, 158] and also, more recently, by a numerical approach that takes into
account the full non-linear evolution [460], and stresses the possible role of non-linearities
in triggering the collapse of a long train of low-amplitude waves, even though the criterion
(3.23) would suggest that they remain perturbative.
    Let us discuss now another toy model example of gravitational collapse, that of the
collision of plane waves, following closely Refs. [245] and [101]. The advantage of this
case is that it can often be solved analytically, thereby providing a useful laboratory for
investigating properties that we would like to be shared by more realistic situations (see
some comments at the end of this subsection). For this reason we shall treat this example
in considerable detail.
    In order to include eventually the NS-NS two-form, we will start from the low-energy
effective action in a form that already exhibits the O(d, d) non-compact symmetry expected
from the d = D − 2 Abelian isometries of the problem1 . This is achieved by working with a
“reduced action” living in the non-trivial (two-dimensional) subspace spanned by time and
by the common direction of propagation of the two waves. Following [469] we write:
                         Z                                                                   
                                    √                     1               
                   S=        dx0 dx1 −ge−φ R + ∂α φ∂ α φ + Tr ∂α M −1 ∂ α M .                          (3.25)
                                                          8
  1
      In this subsection, for simplicity, we have denoted by d what in the rest of the report would be d − 1.


                                                        59
Here the metric gµν is taken to be block-diagonal, with blocks gij and gαβ (the Roman
indices (i, j, . . .) span the transverse directions, while the Greek indices take the values 0
and 1). We arranged the components gij in a d-dimensional matrix G and the non-vanishing
components Bij in another matrix B. M is then the usual 2d-dimensional matrix containing
G and B (see Eq. (2.55)), while φ = φ − (1/2) log det G + constant is the corresponding
shifted dilaton (see Subsection 1.4). The reduced action (3.25) is manifestly invariant under
the global O(d, d) transformations (2.62).
   The corresponding equations of motion are written most conveniently by going to the
conformal gauge for the 2-metric, gαβ = eF ηαβ , and by working with “light-cone” coor-
        √                 √
dinates, 2u = (x0 − x1 ), 2v = (x0 + x1 ). They take the explicitly O(d, d)-invariant
form
                                                                                
             ∂u ∂v exp(−φ) = 0,    ∂u e−φ M −1 ∂v M + ∂v e−φ M −1 ∂u M = 0;                 (3.26)
                                 1                 
              ∂u2 φ − ∂u F ∂u φ + Tr ∂u M −1 ∂u M = 0, and the same with u → v; (3.27)
                                 8
                                  1              
              ∂u ∂v φ − ∂u ∂v F + Tr ∂u M −1 ∂v M = 0.                                 (3.28)
                                  8
The two colliding waves are defined as having their fronts at u = 0 and v = 0, and thus to
collide at u = v = 0 (i.e. at x0 = x1 = 0). The two waves are not assumed to be impulsive,
i.e. their energy density can have any (finite) support at positive u and v, respectively.
    Space-time is naturally divided in four regions: Region I, defined by u, v < 0, is the
space-time in front of the waves, before any interaction takes place. It is trivial Minkowski
space-time with B = 0 and a constant perturbative dilaton (exp(φ0 ) ≪ 1). It will be
convenient to fix the constant in the definition of φ so that, in region I, φ = 0. Region
II, defined by u > 0, v < 0, represents the wave coming from the left before the collision.
Metric and dilaton depend only on u:
              ds2II = −2dudv + GII      i  j
                                ij (u)dx dx ,
                                                            II
                                                     Bij = Bij (u),          φ = φII (u),   (3.29)
and we can consistently set F = 0. Region III can be similarly described up to interchange
of u and v. Note that we have not assumed any special shape for G, so that our results,
so far, hold irrespectively of the polarization of the waves. Finally, in region IV (u > 0,
v > 0), i.e. in the interaction region, we write
                              ds2IV = −2eF dudv + GIV   i  j
                                                   ij dx dx ,                               (3.30)
and F , GIV , φIV and B IV are all functions of both u and v. Of course, the metric must be
continuous along with its derivative on the boundary lines between the four regions. The
same must be true for the dilaton φ and the antisymmetric field B.
   Let us begin by solving the equations in region II. The only non-trivial equation is (3.27),
which (dropping the subscripts II) reads
                                                            2 
                                   ¨ = 1 Tr
                                   φ            M   −1
                                                         Ṁ          ,                      (3.31)
                                       8

                                               60
where the dot indicates the derivative with respect to u. It is now useful to change variables
from u to ũ, with
                                        d           d
                                          = e−2φ/d .                                    (3.32)
                                       du          dũ
After some algebra we can rewrite (3.31) as:
                              ′′                         2            2           
             φ/d        −φ/d             1        1
            e           e            = − 2 φ′2 −    Tr G−1 G′    − Tr G−1 B ′                    ,   (3.33)
                                        d        4d            t
                                                        
where G−1 Ġ is the traceless part of G−1 Ġ , and the prime denotes the derivative with
               t
respect to ũ.
    It can easily be shown that all terms on the r.h.s. of Eq. (3.33) are negative-definite.
Hence, for any non trivial wave, e−φ/d , which is constant and identically equal to 1 in
region I, must acquire a non-vanishing, negative, and never increasing derivative in region
II. Thus, e−φ/d must vanish at some finite ũ = ũ∗ . Returning now to the coordinate u, we
see that, if the dilaton is bounded (a necessary assumption if we want to use the tree-level
effective action), there exists a finite u = u∗ where e−φ/d vanishes. Correspondingly, also
det G vanishes, and the metric of the transverse space will collapse to zero proper volume,
thereby producing a (coordinate) singularity. The same arguments can be repeated in region
III, where det G has to vanish at some finite v = v ∗ , with φ → +∞. These conclusions
generalize a well-known result in D = 4 general relativity [576, 630] to any D and to non
trivial antisymmetric fields, .
    Let us finally analyse region IV (where the interaction between the two waves occurs)
dropping, for simplicity, the subscript IV from all functions. We begin by using Eq. (3.26),
which tells us that e−φ is the sum of a function of u and a function of v. The unique function
of this type that matches the boundary conditions with region I is

                                       e−φ(u,v) = e−φII (u) + e−φIII (v) − 1.                        (3.34)

We see that e−φ(u,v) must vanish on a hypersurface that joins the coordinate singularities
in regions II and III and is contained in the region u ≤ u0 , v ≤ v0 within region IV.
    Let us now introduce two new sets of coordinates that simplify the analysis in region
IV. One set is of the light-cone type:

                        r = r(v) = 2e−φIII (v) − 1,            s = s(u) = 2e−φII (u) − 1,            (3.35)

while the second set is of the t − x kind:
                                            1
                                         ξ = (r + s) = e−φ(u,v) ∼ −t,                                (3.36)
                                            2
                                            1
                                         z = (s − r) = e−φII (u) − e−φIII (v) .                      (3.37)
                                            2
Note that the coordinates r, s run from +1 to −1 in region IV, with their sum always positive
except on the singular boundary where r + s = 0. Going from the original coordinates to

                                                          61
either of the new sets changes only the conformal factor of the 2-metric. We may thus write:
                  ds2IV = −ef dξ 2 + ef dz 2 + Gij dxi dxj = −2ef drds + Gij dxi dxj ,                                                 (3.38)
while the shifted dilaton is simply
                                            φ = − log ξ = − log(r + s)/2.                                                              (3.39)

    Let us discuss in some detail the case of B = 0 and parallel polarized waves following
                                                                         P
[245]. In each region, we take a diagonal G with Gii = eλ+ψi , where       ψi = 0 and λ =
(1/d) log det G goes to −∞ at u = u∗ in region II, and at v = v ∗ in region III. In the new
coordinates, Eq. (3.26) becomes trivial, while the equations for the ψi and λ are decoupled
and can be solved separately. They are also formally the same, so the solutions have the
same structure [576]:
                                            Z1            h                               i                                       
                           1
                                                      ′                  ′   1
                                                                                      ′                        (1 − r) (s′ − s)
          −(r + s) ψi (r, s) =
                           2                        ds (1 + s ) ψi (1, s )   2                  P− 1       1+2
                                                                                          ,s′      2           (1 + s′ ) (r + s)
                                            s
              Z1          h                            i                                                    
                      ′             ′   1
                                                ′                                (1 − s) (r ′ − r)
          +        dr (1 + r ) ψi (r , 1)
                                        2                         P− 1       1+2                    ,                                  (3.40)
                                                           ,r ′      2           (1 + r ′ ) (r + s)
              r

where P−1/2 (x) are Legendre functions written in standard notation, and the commas denote
partial derivatives. The same expression holds for λ, with the obvious replacements. At
this point φ can easily be recovered once λ and φ are known.
    We see that λ and the ψi are singular on the hypersurface ξ = r + s = 0. So, in
a very general way, we find that the collision of two plane waves leads to a (curvature)
singularity in the space-time, whatever the number of dimensions. Although we do not
have, at the moment, such an explicit solution for the general case, the discussion given in
the previous section makes us believe that a curvature singularity will always emerge along
the hypersurface ξ = 0.
    For the solutions (3.40), the asymptotic behaviour for ξ → 0 is easily found by taking
the large-argument limit of the Legendre function [576] (see also [630]):
       ψi (ξ, z) ∼ ǫi (z) log ξ,                    λ (ξ, z) ∼ κ (z) log ξ,                     f (ξ, z) ∼ a (z) log ξ.                (3.41)
The coefficients multiplying the logarithm are functions of z, whose range, on the singular
surface, goes from −1 to 1. One easily finds
                                                          Z1        h                           i  s + 1  12
                                           1                                      1
                          ǫi (z) =       √                        ds (1 + s) ψ (1, s)
                                                                                  2                                +
                                        π 1+z                                                    ,s        s−z
                                                          z

                                            1
                                                              Z1         h            1
                                                                                                  i  r + 1  21
                                        + √                        dr (1 + r) 2 ψ (r, 1)                               ,               (3.42)
                                         π 1−z                                                        ,r    r+z
                                                              −z
                                        1X                   d
                          a (z) =                   ǫ2i (z) + κ2 (z) − 1 ,                                                             (3.43)
                                        4                    4

                                                                             62
with κ (z) given by the same expression as ǫi , but with ψi replaced by λ. The sum of the ǫi
must be zero according to the definition of the ψi .
   The asymptotic form of the metric is
                                                                   X                   2
                    ds2IV = −ξ a(z) dξ 2 + ξ a(z) dz 2 + ξ κ(z)          ξ ǫi (z) dxi        ,   (3.44)

while                                                      
                                              d
                                     φ ∼ − 1 + κ(z) log ξ .                                      (3.45)
                                              2
                                       2
Going over to cosmic time ξ = t a(z)+2 gives the metric in Kasner form with exponents

                                       a (z)                       κ(z) + ǫi (z)
                        p1 (z) =               ,        pi (z) =                 .               (3.46)
                                     a (z) + 2                       a (z) + 2

The following relations are immediately verified:
                              D−1
                                                   !               D−1
                              X                                    X
                       φ=            pα (z) − 1 log t,                   p2α (z) = 1.            (3.47)
                               α=1                                 α=1


    The behaviour of the fields near the singularity is thus of Kasner type, modified, as
usual, by the presence of the dilaton. Note that, at the two tips of the singularity, ǫi and κ
diverge in such a way that the Kasner exponents near the tips are simply p1 = 1, pi = 0.
This corresponds to a (contracting) Milne-like metric, which, being non-singular, nicely
matches the non-singular behaviour in regions II and III. Away from these two points, κ
and ǫi can take any value: it is easy to verify that the whole Kasner sphere can be covered
by appropriately choosing the initial data.
    It may be interesting to note that, in such a context, it is possible to estimate the
entropy generated by the non-linear interaction of the incoming waves, before the Universe
enters the phase of inflation, during the intermediate phase dominated by both the velocity
and spatial gradients [246]. The total produced entropy is of the order of the product of the
focal lengths of the two incoming waves (in Planck units), and satisfies the entropy bounds
that will be discussed in Section 8.4.
    Let us finally perform O(d, d) boosts on our solutions, in order to introduce a non-trivial
Bµν field. We will refer to [101] for a full discussion and only summarize here the final result.
Cosmologies with non-trivial Bµν that can be obtained, by an O(d, d) transformation, from
a metric having Kasner behaviour near the singularity, generally contract in all dimensions.
In even dimensions, at least one inflates when the original metric has just one inflating or just
one contracting dimension. In odd dimensions, if the O(d, d) transformation has det Q = 0
and we start from a full inflating metric or from a metric with one inflating dimension, then
we are left with one inflating dimension. If det P = 0, then one dimension inflates when we
start from a full contracting metric or from a metric having just one contracting dimension.


                                                       63
We should also recall that none of the O(d, d) transformations affects the g11 component of
the metric, which, therefore, can either inflate or contract.
    How do these results generalize to more realistic situations such as the head-on collision
of two plane-fronted waves, with a transverse profile that extends only over a finite range?
Unfortunately such cases cannot be dealt with analytically, and numerical results are not
available either, as far as we know. There have been claims [630], however, that black holes
(and singularities therein) are inevitably formed, provided certain conditions are met.
   Consider, an an example, two identical waves of transverse size L, moving head on
against each other, and carrying, in the centre-of-mass frame, energy density (per unit
area) ρ. The conjecture [630] is that a black hole of mass O(ρL2 ) will form, provided

                                       L > c(Gρ)−1 ,                                   (3.48)

where c is a number O(1).
    This conjecture appears to be confirmed by applying a recently proposed method [228]
for determining when black holes are formed in point-like particle collisions at finite impact
parameter. A simple extension of that method [418] to two finite-size massless waves shows
that Eq. (3.48) is indeed a good criterion for black-hole formation with c ≤ 1/4π.


3.5   Adding p-forms and BKL chaotic behaviour

We have already mentioned that adding a NS-NS two-form to the background strongly re-
duces the parameter space available for inflating the Universe (in string units). However,
very generally, a smooth Kasner-like behaviour is still generically valid near the singular-
ity. Spatial gradients become small with respect to time derivatives, and solutions become
velocity-dominated, thereby solving, at least in principle, the flatness/homogeneity prob-
lems.
    This result appears to be in contrast with what is known to happen in a standard general
relativity context. Indeed, Belinskii, Khalatnikov and Lifshitz (BKL) postulated a long time
ago [76] that the approach to a big crunch singularity (the time-reversal of our situation) is
typically chaotic, in contrast with the naive expectation that, near the singularity, kinetic
terms should dominate over spatial gradients since (3) R ∼ a−2 ≪ R ∼ t−2 , for a scale
factor going to zero with a small power of t. This would certainly be true for an isotropic
situation. However, because of the constraints on the exponents αi = (d ln ai /d ln t) of the
(general relativistic) Kasner solution,
                                     X          X
                                         αi =        α2i = 1,                          (3.49)

the only non-trivial vacuum cosmologies are anisotropic.
    As a consequence, there are gradient terms that are subdominant and others that,
instead, grow faster than the extrinsic curvature itself (the expansion contribution to cur-

                                                64
vature), and start dominating at some point. When this happens the Kasner exponents
suddenly change and a new Kasner epoch starts, until another spatial gradient dominates
. . . , and so on indefinitely. One can visualize this behaviour as the motion of a particle in
a billiard, where the Kasner-like phases are the straight motions while the sudden changes
in the Kasner exponents correspond to reflections. Unless the “billiard” in question is par-
ticularly simple, a chaotic behaviour then follows. This phenomenon goes under the name
of BKL oscillations.
    It was known for some time that BKL oscillations occur in general relativity for any
D < 11. However, the phenomenon was known to disappear if a massless, minimally coupled
scalar field is added. The dilaton of string cosmology is just such a field, and therefore BKL
oscillations do not appear in gravidilaton string cosmology, as explicitly shown in [58]. One
way to see this is to realize that, in the presence of a dilaton, an isotropic solution is perfectly
allowed, and therefore all spatial gradients can be kept under control. Thus, possibly after a
small number of oscillations, the Kasner exponents end up in a region (close to the isotropic
point) where no more oscillations occur until the singularity.
     Adding the NS-NS two-form does not appear to change the situation with respect to
BKL oscillations, as shown in many of the examples of inhomogeneous string cosmology
discussed in Subsection 3.1. The same is true in the presence of various kinds of axion
fields (see e.g. the case of the Type IIB string cosmology discussed in [248]), or in the
context of the gravidilaton–axion–Maxwell system giving rise to inhomogeneous Gowdy-
type solutions [500, 629]. On the basis of these examples it was believed for some time that
BKL oscillations were the exception, rather than the rule, for string cosmology.
    The surprise came when it was pointed out [190, 191] that BKL oscillations reappear
generically if all the massless bosonic background fields of superstring theory (or M-theory)
are turned on. Note that, even under the assumption of asymptotic past triviality, there
is no reason to artificially put to zero any of these massless backgrounds. According to
APT, the generic initial state should be an arbitrary superposition of weakly interacting,
low-frequency waves of all kinds. Setting arbitrarily to zero some of them would amount to
fine-tuning the initial state, and could even be unstable under quantum effects.
    The emergence of chaos discovered in [190, 191] could have been anticipated, since
we can view the gravidilaton system in D = 4 as coming from dimensional reduction
of a pure gravity theory in more dimensions. Upon dimensional reduction, the higher
dimensional graviton generates both the dilaton and additional gauge fields. The electric
and/or magnetic components of these fields, unless artificially turned off, will grow and
cause BKL behaviour. Let us now go in some length into this matter, nevertheless referring
to the original articles for full details.
   The starting point is the low-energy tree-level bosonic action of a generic string theory




                                                65
(or of M-theory) which, in the Einstein frame, can be written in the form:
                               Z            "                                            #
                                        √                         X
                                    D                                    λp ϕ        2
                      S=−          d x g R(g) + .... +                cp e      (dAp )       ,       (3.50)
                                                                  p

where the index p labels the various p-forms that are present in a given superstring model,
and cp , λp are numerically coefficients. There are actually possible additional terms, e.g.
Chern-Simons terms, but these are not relevant to this discussion. One then assumes the
inhomogeneous-Kasner ansatz of Subsection 3.1, rewritten in the Einstein frame as:
                               X
               ds2 = dt2 −         eai (x) eaj (x) (−t)2pa (x) dxi dxj ,          φ = pϕ log(−t) ,
                               a
               X                                     X
                    pa = 1 ,             p2ϕ = 1 −        p2a ,              t<0.                    (3.51)
                a                                     a


     In order to check whether such a non-chaotic, non-oscillatory ansatz is an asymptotic
solution one has to check whether all neglected terms remain parametrically small as t → 0.
Several terms are possibly dangerous. Dilaton gradients are always harmless, but metric
gradients are “down” with respect to the time-derivative terms by a factor |t|2gijk , where
gijk is the following combination of Kasner exponents, gijk = 1 + pi − pj − pk . In order
for these terms to be negligible, it is necessary that all gijk be positive. Furthermore, the
equations of motion for the various forms turn out to imply the constancy of both the
                                                                         √
“magnetic” components, Fj1 ...jp+1 , and of the “electric” components, geλp ϕ F 0ii ...ip , of the
field strength Fp+1 ≡ dAp . When such a result is inserted back in the complete equations of
motion one finds further constraints on the Kasner exponents and on the “dilaton couplings”
λp , which need to be satisfied in order for the solution (3.51) to hold.
     The explicit analysis of [190, 191] shows that in any known D = 10 superstring theory,
as well as in D = 11 supergravity (the low-energy limit of M-theory), the couplings λp are
just what is needed to reduce the parameter space for the validity of (3.51) to a set of zero
measure. The generic case is instead chaotic, and can be described in terms of motion on a
billiard in a 9-dimensional hyperbolic space [193]. The reflection rules in the billiard form a
group that turns out to be the Weyl group of the hyperbolic Kac–Moody algebras of E10 or
BE10 , depending on the particular superstring theory under consideration. Similar groups
were also found to emerge in the case of Kaluza–Klein compactification of pure gravity in
D = d + 1 ≥ 4 [194]. The Weyl group is now related to the Kac–Moody algebra AEd ,
and the disappearance of chaos for D ≥ 11 gets related to the fact that these algebras are
hyperbolic only for d < 10.
    Let us finally mention a connection between the BKL chaotic behaviour and the peculiar
features of some homogeneous string cosmology models, in particular those with a non-
trivial antisymmetric field Bµν . We have already seen that the presence of such a backgound
tends to reduce drastically (if not completely) the phase space left for inflationary pre-big
bang behaviour. In Ref. [192] it was shown that this can be understood again as motion in

                                                     66
a billiard. Whenever the initial Kasner exponents are such as to give inflation, some walls
are hit a certain (finite) number of times until the ensuing reflections bring the S-frame
Kasner exponents to be positive, thereby stopping the inflationary behaviour and turning
it into a contraction.
    From the physical viewpoint the implications of all these results are not so obvious,
also because the conditions for BKL behaviour are just met at the tree level and to lowest
order in α′ . It is possible that the inclusion of either α′ or loop corrections will bring the
oscillations to a stop (after a relatively small number of them [190, 191]). It is not clear,
however, which kind of string-scale-curvature hypersurface will be generated by the whole
process. It is unlikely that it will be very simple and homogeneous, but it is not obvious that
it will not contain isotropic and homogeneous enough patches for our Universe to emerge
from.


3.6   Is pre-big bang cosmology fine-tuned?

The two arbitrary parameters discussed in the previous subsection are very important, since
they determine the range of validity of our description. In fact, since both curvature and
coupling increase during the initial phase of dilaton-driven inflation, the low-energy and/or
tree-level description is bound to break down at some point. The smaller the initial Hubble
parameter (i.e. the larger the initial horizon size) and the smaller the initial coupling, the
longer we can follow the phase of low-energy inflation through the effective action equations,
and the larger the number of reliable e-folds we shall gain.
    This does answer, in our opinion, the objections raised [588] to the pre-big bang scenario
according to which it is fine-tuned. The situation here actually resembles that of chaotic
inflation [439]. Given some generic (though APT) initial data, we should ask which is
the distribution of sizes of the collapsing regions and of couplings therein. Then, only the
“tails” of these distributions, i.e. those corresponding to sufficiently large and sufficiently
weakly coupled regions will produce Universes like ours, the rest will not. The question
of how likely a “good” big bang is to take place is not very well posed and can be greatly
affected by anthropic considerations [129]. Furthermore, asking for a long enough period of
low-energy inflation amounts to setting upper limits on two arbitrary moduli of the classical
solutions.
    Figure 3.2 is a (2 + 1)-dimensional sketch of a possible pre-big bang Universe: an origi-
nal “sea” of dilatonic and gravity waves leads to collapsing regions of different initial size,
possibly to a scale-invariant distribution of them. Each one of these collapses is reinter-
preted, in the S-frame, as the process by which a baby Universe is born after a period of
pre-big bang inflationary “pregnancy”, the size of each baby Universe being determined by
the duration of the corresponding pregnancy, i.e. by the initial size of (and coupling in)
the corresponding collapsing region. By using, in particular, the result of Eq. (2.110) one


                                              67
                           time




                                                 chaotic sea
                                            of gravi-scalar waves




Figure 3.2: Qualitative space-time illustration of the possible birth of pre-big bang Universes
from a chaotic sea of gravidilaton waves. Each baby Universe is simultaneously represented
in the S-frame (like an expanding cone) and in the E-frame (like a shrinking hole), and it
is followed for an increasing time interval as we move upward in the figure.


finds that, in d = 3, regions initially larger than 1019 λs (namely, larger than 10−13 cm if
λs ∼ λP ∼ 10−32 cm) can generate Universes like ours, while smaller ones cannot.
    A basic difference between the large numbers needed in (non-inflationary) FRW cosmol-
ogy and the large numbers needed in pre-big bang cosmology, should be stressed. In the
former, the ratio of two classical scales, e.g. of total curvature to its spatial component,
which is expected to be O(1), has to be taken as large as 1060 . In the latter, the above
ratio is initially O(1) in the collapsing/inflating region, and ends up being very large in
that same region, thanks to the inflation. However, the (common) order of magnitude of
these two classical quantities is a free parameter, and it is taken to be much larger than the
classically irrelevant quantum scale. Indeed, the smallness of quantum corrections (which
would introduce a scale in the problem) was explicitly checked in [343].
    An example of what we have just said is the case of the collision of two finite-front
plane waves. It is clear from Eq. (3.48) that all that matters is the ratio of two geometrical
classical quantities, the transverse size L and the focal distance (Gρ)−1 . Neither the Planck
nor the string lengths appear in the collapse criterion. Even the appearance of the Newton
constant in (3.48) is somewhat misleading: as always in the context of classical general
relativity, the Newton constant can be removed by a convenient choice of units of energy,
and then everything reduces to geometrical quantities.
   We can visualize analogies and differences between standard and pre-big bang inflation

                                               68
by looking again at the two cases of Figs. 1.2 and 1.3. The common feature in the two
pictures is that the fixed comoving scale corresponding to the present horizon was “inside
the horizon” for some time during inflation, possibly very deeply inside at its onset. The
difference between the two scenarios is just in the behaviour of the Hubble radius during
inflation: increasing in standard inflation, decreasing in string cosmology. Thus, while
standard inflation is still facing the initial-singularity question, and needs a non-adiabatic
phenomenon to reheat the Universe (a kind of small bang), pre-big bang cosmology faces
the singularity problem later, combining it with the exit and heating problems (see Section
8).
    A much more relevant objection to this approach to initial conditions is the one raised
in [190, 192]. If the initial conditions are to be really generic (although satisfying APT),
then all massless waves should be allowed. Already with antisymmetric tensor waves the
phase of dilaton-driven inflation is becoming non-generic, while, when all massless forms are
included, BKL behaviour seems to be the generic situation, at least before strong curvature
and/or strong coupling is reached. Understanding the fate of such evolutions calls for
a deeper understanding of how string effects may resolve the singularity problem (to be
discussed in Section 8).


4    Amplification of quantum fluctuations

If we accept, at least as a working hypothesis, the idea that the pre-big bang scenario illus-
trated in the previous sections might represent a possible candidate for a self-consistent rep-
resentation of the primordial cosmological evolution, we are eventually led to the following
fundamental questions: Is it possible to find phenomenological effects that can differentiate
the pre-big bang scenario from other, more conventional inflationary scenarios, and Are
such differences observable today, at least in principle?
    In order to answer this question we may note that the accelerated evolution of the
Universe is a process accompanied by the production of an enormous amount of radiation.
Almost all types of fields are excited, and particles are copiously produced, with an effi-
ciency that reaches its maximum during the explosive “big bang” regime. By studying the
properties of the relic cosmic backgrounds we may obtain information about the very early
state of the Universe, just as by studying the quantum numbers of the particles produced
in a decay process we can get information on the quantum state of the system before the
decay.
    From the various mechanisms of radiation production, active on a cosmological scale, we
will consider here the parametric amplification of the quantum fluctuations of the vacuum,
because it is typical of all backgrounds with accelerated kinematics, and it is effective in all
inflationary scenarios. It thus represents a good “indicator” of the dynamics of the early
Universe [349, 350, 356] and an appropriate starting point to discriminate among different


                                              69
inflationary models.
    Although in this section we will mainly concentrate on the study of the metric fluc-
tuations, our discussion can be easily applied to the evolution of the fluctuations of any
background field. The convenient formalism to be adopted for the study of this process is
the theory of cosmological perturbations (see [492, 433] for two excellent and comprehen-
sive reviews), which provides a straightforward and (in principle) simple approach to the
problem. According to this approach, given a set of background field equations

                                          Gµν = Tµν ,                                     (4.1)

the standard procedure is to perturb (to first order) the metric and the matter sources:
                           (0)
                    gµν = gµν  + δ(1) gµν ,                 (0)
                                                     Tµν = Tµν  + δ(1) Tµν ,              (4.2)

expanding around a given cosmological solution. By using the unperturbed equations for
                         (0)    (0)
the bakground fields, Gµν = Tµν , one easily obtains a system of linear equations describing
the evolution of the first-order fluctuations of the metric and of the matter fields,

                                      δ(1) Gµν = δ(1) Tµν ,                               (4.3)

and can then discuss, on the basis of these equations, the amount of radiation production.
    This perturbative approach is the same for all cosmological scenarios. There are two
important differences, however, that characterize pre-big bang models with respect to other
inflationary models.
    The first difference concerns the higher-dimensional and scalar-tensor (i.e. gravidilaton)
nature of the string cosmology backgrounds. As a consequence, there are possible contri-
butions to the amplification of the fluctuations not only from the inflation of the three-
dimensional space, but also from the dynamics of the extra-dimensions [264, 25, 207, 296],
and from the time evolution of the coupling constants (i.e. of the dilaton), as first pointed
out in [299]. The amplification of the perturbations thus becomes possible also for fields con-
formally coupled to the 3-dimensional metric, unlike in the standard cosmological scenario
[90].
    The second difference concerns the growing character of the background curvature and
of the couplings. In such a background the quantum fluctuations start evolving from an
asymptotically flat, zero-coupling state, so that they can be naturally normalized to an
initial vacuum fluctuation spectrum. After the amplification their final configuration thus
corresponds to a “squeezed vacuum” state [354, 355, 351], and not to a “squeezed-thermal
vacuum” [304], or to other, more complicated states. In addition, since the final energy
distribution tends to follow (in frequency) the behaviour (in time) of the curvature scale, one
typically obtains in such a context a growing (or “blue”) spectrum [570, 3, 349, 12, 548, 356].
As a consequence, the peak amplitude of the produced radiation may be high enough to
support a picture in which all the radiation filling our present Universe was directly produced

                                               70
from the quantum fluctuations of the vacuum [601, 275]. This effect may facilitate the
detection of a cosmic background of relic gravitational waves [295, 272], as will be discussed
in Section 5, but it complicates the generation of a scale-invariant spectrum of curvature
perturbations, eventually producing the observed CMB anisotropy (see Section 7).
    A further consequence of the growth of the curvature scale, however, is that the comoving
amplitude of the perturbations may even grow outside the horizon, instead of being frozen
as in standard inflationary models. This effect, implicitly contained in the earlier pioneering
studies of cosmological perturbations [570], was first explicitly pointed out in [2], and only
later independently rediscovered in a string cosmology context [320] and in the context
of scalar-tensor gravity [64]. Such a growth of the amplitude may require an appropriate
and non-conventional choice of the gauge [115] in order to restore the validity of the linear
approximation, and to allow the application of the standard perturbative formalism.
    In the following subsections we will discuss in some detail the above effects, typical of
the evolution of perturbations in the context of the pre-big bang scenario.


4.1   “Frame” independence

The computation of the spectrum according to the theory of cosmological perturbations
[492] requires a series of formal steps, the first of which is the choice of the “frame”, i.e. of
the basic set of fields (metric included) used to parametrize the action. Any theory is in
general characterized by a preferred set of fields, but one might wonder what happens when
there are more than one preferred choices (this is a typical situation of all scalar-tensor
models of gravity, as in the case of the gravidilaton string effective action).
    In string theory there is a preferred frame (the so-called S-frame), in which the coupling
to a constant dilaton is unambiguously fixed (at the tree level) for all fields and to all orders
in the higher-derivative α′ expansion. Also, the metric of this frame is the one to which
fundamental strings are minimally coupled [551, 314] (in other words, the world-paths of
strings freely evolving in a curved background are geodesic surfaces of this metric). In the
S-frame, and in d + 1 dimensions, the gravidilaton effective action takes the form
                                   Z         q        h                i
                               1
                       S = d−1        dd+1 x |g| e−φ −R + ω (∇µ φ)2                         (4.4)
                            2λs
(for the sake of generality we have included here the Brans–Dicke coefficient ω, which in our
context could represent a dilaton self-coupling possibly arising from higher-loop corrections
[346]; in particular, ω = −1 for the lowest-order string effective action).
     For any ω, however, this action can always be rewritten in the (more conventional)
E-frame, in which the graviton and dilaton kinetic terms are diagonalized in the standard
canonical form, and the dilaton is minimally coupled to the metric. Consider, in fact, the
field redefinition g → ge performed with the help of a new scalar variable ψ:
                                         gµν = geµν eψ .                                   (4.5)

                                               71
By expressing the scalar curvature R in terms of ge [615, 575], the action (4.4) becomes
                Z            q                                                              
          1                              (d−1)        d(d − 1)  e 2
                                                        e + d∇
                                                             e 2ψ +
                                                                             
                                                                               e µφ
                                                                                    2
   S=               dd+1 x   |ge| e−φ+     2
                                               ψ
                                                       −R        ∇µ ψ + ω ∇             ,
        2λd−1
          s                                               4
                                                                                       (4.6)
where the tilde denotes geometrical quantities computed with respect to ge. By setting (ω =
const, ω > −d/(d − 1)):
                                                                               
                                                            e     2d + 2ω(d − 1) 1/2
                       (d − 1)ψ = 2φ,                       φ=φ                      ,           (4.7)
                                                                       d−2
and neglecting a total derivative, we are led eventually to the E-frame action of general
                                     e
relativity for the new variables ge, φ:
                                          Z                 q                   
                               1               d+1                 e   1  e e2
                          S = d−1             d        x     |ge| −R +    ∇µ φ     .             (4.8)
                             2λs                                        2

    Please note the “right” canonical coefficient in front of the dilaton kinetic term (we
remember that we are using the signature g00 > 0) and the possible change of sign from the
S-frame action (4.4) (where ω = −1, to lowest order). The E-frame is thus preferred for
performing canonical quantization, for identifying the particle content of the theory, and
for defining the effective low-energy masses and couplings (see also Section 6).
   However, the field equations for g, φ, obtained by varying the action (4.4), are different
                           e obtained by varying the action (4.8). As a consequence, also the
from the equations for ge, φ,
perturbation equations (4.3), in the S-frame, are different from the E-frame perturbation
equations, and one might wonder which is the “right” frame to be used, when computing
cosmological effects to be compared with present observations.
    This is a false problem, however, because the (final) observable variables, such as the
spectral amplitude, the spectral energy density (see Subsection 4.4), are exactly the same in
both frames [320] (an obvious consequence of the fact that physical measurable quantities
cannot be changed by field redefinitions such as the transformation (4.5); see also [19] for a
recent discussion of the equivalence between the String and Einstein frames). The formal
reason of this frame-independence is that the perturbation equations are indeed different
in the two frames, but the classical solutions around which the expansion is performed are
also different, and the two differences exactly compensate each other. This result can be
generally proved by perturbing the action, better than the equations of motion (see Section
4.3). It is instructive, however, to give also a particular example, as will be done here
by considering tensor metric perturbations propagating in a (d + 1)-dimensional external
background.
   We will start the computation in the S-frame, where the background equations obtained
from the action (4.4) can be written explicitly as
                                                        h                                i
                    Rµ ν + ∇µ ∇ν φ + (ω + 1) δµν (∇α φ)2 − δµν ✷φ − ∇µ φ∇ν φ = 0,
                    R + ω (∇α φ)2 − 2ω✷φ = 0.                                                    (4.9)

                                                            72
We shall consider the transverse, traceless part of the metric perturbations,

       δ(1) φ = 0,              δ(1) gµν = hµν ,          δ(1) gµν = −hµν ,      ∇ν hµ ν = 0 = hµ ν ,   (4.10)

propagating in a higher-dimensional, spatially flat, factorizable background with d “exter-
nal” and n “internal” dimensions, with scale factors a(t) and b(t), respectively. Also, we
shall assume that the translations along the internal dimensions are isometries of the full,
perturbed metric (see [327] for a more general situation in which also the internal gradients
of the fluctuations are non-zero, and see the comment after Eq. (4.25) for backgrounds with
non-factorizable geometry). The fluctuations of the external space hij (xi , t) are then conve-
niently described in the synchronous gauge [425], where (i, j = 1, ..., d; m, n = d+1, ..., d+n):

                                g00 = 1,        g0i = 0,       gij = −a2 δij ,   gmn = −b2 δmn ,
                                h00 = 0,        h0i = 0,        g ij hij = 0,    ∂j hi j = 0.           (4.11)

In this gauge
                                                        1 j                        1
                                           δ(1) Γ0i j =   ḣi , δ(1) Γij 0 = − ḣij ,
                                                        2                          2
                                                        1                              
                                           δ(1) Γij k =      ∂i hj k + ∂j hi k − ∂ k hij ;              (4.12)
                                                        2
to first order in h, the perturbation of the dilaton equation is found to be trivially satisfied,
and there are no contributions from the terms inside the square brackets in (4.9). The
perturbation equations are thus (remarkably) ω-independent [299]:
                                                                                  
                                  δ(1) Rµ ν − δ(1) gνα Γµα 0 + g να δ(1) Γµα 0 φ̇ = 0.                  (4.13)

For µ, ν 6= i, j, they are trivially satisfied. The (i, j) components of the Ricci tensor, on the
other hand, lead to the higher-dimensional covariant d’Alembert operator [296, 208, 299]
                                                                                  !
                 (1)        j      1          ȧ        ḃ      ∇2                       1
             δ         Ri       =−   ḧi j + d ḣi j + n ḣi j − 2 hi j               ≡ − ✷hi j = 0,    (4.14)
                                   2          a         b       a                        2

where ∇2 = ∂i2 and the indices of h are raised and lowered with the unperturbed metric.
Using the identities (see also [277])

                                      gjk ḣik = ḣi j + 2Hhi j ,
                                      gjk ḧik = ḧi j + 2Ḣhi j + 4H ḣi j + 4H 2 hi j ,               (4.15)

we are finally led to the S-frame tensor perturbation equation [299]

                                                     ✷hi j − φ̇ḣi j = 0.                               (4.16)

In terms of the conformal time coordinate η, such that dt = adη, this wave equation can
also be rewritten (for each polarization mode h) as follows,
                                                     a′ ′   b′
                                    h′′ + (d − 1)      h + n h′ − φ′ h′ − ∇2 h = 0.                     (4.17)
                                                     a      b

                                                                73
    Let us now repeat the computation in the E-frame, where the background equations
following from the action (4.8) can be written as

                          e µν = 1 ∂µ φ∂
                          R           e ν φ,
                                          e                    e µ∇
                                                          geµν ∇     e = 0.
                                                                  e νφ                    (4.18)
                                 2
Perturbing to first order, and using Eqs. (4.10):

                                               eµ ν = 0
                                          δ(1) R                                          (4.19)

(the perturbation of the scalar Klein–Gordon equation is trivially satisfied). In the syn-
chronous gauge, we can still apply Eq. (4.14) (for the “tilded” variables), and we are finally
led to the E-frame perturbation equation

                                             eh
                                             ✷ e i j = 0.                                 (4.20)

                                                       e
In conformal time, and for each polarization component h,
                                 "            #
                                       e′
                                       a    e
                                            b′ e ′
                            e ′′
                            h + (d − 1) + n            e = 0.
                                                h − ∇2 h                                  (4.21)
                                       a
                                       e    e
                                            b

    This last equation seems to be different from the S-frame equation (4.17). We have to
                                                                                  ea
recall, however, that the conformal time is the same in both frames, dη = dt/a = dt/ e = dηe
(see Section 2.4), and that, according to Eq. (4.5),

                                                            e′
                                                            a     e
                                                                  b′        a′  b′
  e = ae−φ/(d+n−1) ,
  a                     e
                        b = be−φ/(d+n−1) ,      (d − 1)        + n = (d − 1) + n − φ′ . (4.22)
                                                            a
                                                            e     e
                                                                  b         a   b
                                         e the same solution and, as a consequence, the
We thus have the same equation for h and h,
same spectrum when the solution is expanded in Fourier modes.
    In other words, the observable results of the perturbative analysis are “frame-independent”
and, when computing the spectrum, we are allowed to use the frame that is most convenient
for practical purposes.


4.2   Choice of the “gauge” for scalar perturbations

Within each frame, we have a possible additional ambiguity due to the choice of the gauge,
i.e. the choice of the parametrization of the given metric manifold. The step corresponding
to this choice is more delicate than the choice of the frame: in spite of the fact that the final
observable spectrum has to be certainly independent of the given coordinate system, the
perturbative analysis is, on the contrary, “gauge-dependent”. It is possible, for instance,
that a linearized description of the perturbations is valid in a given system of coordinates,
and yet that the linear approximation is broken in a different system. This problem ob-
viously disappears in the context of a fully covariant and gauge-invariant (to all orders)

                                                 74
description of perturbations [234, 112]. For the perturbative approach usually adopted in
a cosmological context [492], however, gauge invariance holds in the linear approximation
only, and breaks down at higher orders.
    An important example of this effect is provided, in string cosmology, by the time evo-
lution of the scalar (metric and dilaton) perturbations. We will discuss this effect in the
E-frame (dropping the “tilde”, for simplicity), starting from the unperturbed equations
(4.18), and using, as in the previous subsection, a homogeneous, Bianchi-I-type, higher-
dimensional background, with d + n factorized structure:

                        gµν = diag(a2 , −a2 δij , −b2 δmn ),       φ = φ(η).                (4.23)

We shall consider, in particular, the exact background solution parametrized by
                                                      s                    √
                    α                 β                     2      n−d− d+n
           a = (|η|) ,      b = (|η|) ,   φ=                             √         ln(|η|),
                                                          d+n−1 1+ d+n
                    √                                             √
                       d + n + 1 − 2n                               d + n − 1 + 2d
           α=        √                  ,                 β=       √                  ,     (4.24)
                (1 + d + n)(d + n − 1)                        (1 + d + n)(d + n − 1)

and corresponding to the conformal-time parametrization of the vacuum solution already
introduced in Eq. (2.114). For η < 0, η → 0− , this unperturbed solution describes a phase of
accelerated evolution, growing curvature and growing dilaton, in which the horizon expands
more slowly (to be more precise, shrinks faster) than the scale factor. It is thus a good
background candidate to amplify metric fluctuations. In the S-frame it describes a phase of
superinflation and dynamical dimensional reduction, in which d dimensions are expanding
and n dimensions are contracting, with scale factors related by the duality transformation
b = a−1 .
    Let us perturb the metric and the dilaton around this solution, by using the isometries
of the factorizable geometry (4.23) and assuming that all dynamical variables depend only
on the “external” coordinates xi , i = 1, ..., d (so that the translations along the internal
dimensions are also isometries of the full, perturbed background) [300]. In this case, modes
with different rotational transformation properties are decoupled, and the scalar component
of the background perturbations can be written in general as [492, 300]:
                                                
      δ(1) φ = χ,         ds2 = gµν + δ(1) gµν dxµ dxν =
                            h                                                  i
      a2 (1 + 2ϕ) dη 2 − a2 (1 − 2ψ) dx2i + 2∂i ∂j Edxi dxj + 2∂i Bdxi dη − b2 (1 − 2ξ)dx2m ,
                                                                                            (4.25)

where all variables depend only on η and xi . It should be noted that this approach is ap-
propriate to the standard Kaluza–Klein scenario, but it cannot be applied to non-factorized
geometrical structures such as those appearing in the context of the Randall–Sundrum sce-
nario [530]. In this last case, the study of scalar metric and dilaton fluctuations (see for


                                                 75
instance [99, 336]) requires a more general metric decomposition [596]. In this report, how-
ever, we will restrict our discussion to the perturbations of higher-dimensional Kaluza–Klein
backgrounds of the standard, factorizable type.
    In our case, it is important to stress that the six functions ϕ, ψ, E, B, ξ, χ are not
invariant under local infinitesimal transformations of coordinates,

                    xµ → xµ + ǫµ (x),             gµν → gµν − ∇µ ǫν − ∇ν ǫµ .          (4.26)

However, if we consider infinitesimal coordinate transformations depending on two scalar
parameters ǫ0 abd ǫ,

                 ǫµ = (ǫ0 , ∂ i ǫ, 0),     η → η + ǫ0 ,          xi → xi + ∂ i ǫ,      (4.27)

and thus preserving the scalar character of the perturbations (in other words, coordinate
transformations that do not add vector or tensor components to the perturbed metric),
then the scalar variables transform as
                          a′ 0      ′              a′                      b′ 0
                   ϕ→ϕ−       ǫ − ǫ0 ,    ψ → ψ + ǫ0 ,              ξ→ξ+      ǫ
                           a                       a                        b
                   E → E − ǫ,          B → B + ǫ − ǫ′ ,
                                                0
                                                                    χ → χ − φ′ ǫ0 ,    (4.28)

and it is always possible to define a set of variables that are gauge-invariant, in the linear
approximation. For instance [300]:

                              1                                     a′
                      Φ = ϕ + [(B − E ′ )a]′ ,            Ψ=ψ−         (B − E ′ ),
                              a                                     a
                             b′
                      Ξ = ξ − (B − E ′ ),                 X = χ + φ′ (B − E ′ ).       (4.29)
                             b
The first two variables (also called Bardeen potentials [53, 553]) are phenomenologically
important, since their spectral amplitudes Φk , Ψk , at the recombination era are directly
related (via the Sachs–Wolfe effect) to the large-scale CMB anisotropy (∆T /T )k , currently
observed by astrophysical experiments (see Section 7).
    A natural and convenient choice of the gauge is thus the so-called longitudinal (or
conformally Newtonian) gauge, in which E = 0 = B, and the perturbed metric depends
directly on the Bardeen potentials, according to Eqs. (4.29). In this gauge the coordinates
are totally fixed because, according to the variation of the metric under the transformation
(4.28), the choice E = 0 = B completely fixes ǫ0 and ǫi , and leaves no residual degrees of
freedom.
   In this gauge we can now write explicitly the set of perturbed field equations

                           δ(1) Rµν = ∂µ φ∂ν χ,
                           δ(1) gµν ∇µ ∇ν φ + ∇2 χ − gµν δ(1) Γµν α ∂α φ = 0,          (4.30)


                                                  76
obtained from the unperturbed Einstein equations (4.18). From the (i, j 6= i) component of
the perturbation equations we obtain a useful relation between three perturbation variables,

                                      ϕ = (d − 2)ψ + nξ.                              (4.31)

The (0, i) components give a constraint, while the (i, i) and (m, m) components of the
perturbed Einstein equations, combined with the (0, 0) component, provide the following
interesting system of coupled equations for the “external” and “internal” perturbations ψ
and ξ [300, 326]:
                                                                              
                         ′         a′      b′                          a′    b′
        (d − 1) ✷ψ + ψ 3(d − 1) + 3n             = −n ✷ξ + ξ ′ 3(d − 1) + 3n             ,
                                   a        b                          a     b
                            ′     ′                       
                            a     b
        d ✷ψ + ψ ′ 3(d − 1) +         (2(d − 1)(n − 1) + nd) =
                            a     bd
                                                                
                          ′      a′                            b′
        = −(n − 1) ✷ξ + ξ               (3dn − d − n + 1) + 3n       ,                (4.32)
                              a(n − 1)                         b
                    
where ✷ ≡ ∂ 2 /∂η 2 − ∇2 denotes here the usual (flat-space) d’Alembert operator.
    This system can easily be diagonalized to find the (time-dependent) linear combination
of ψ and ξ that represents the true “propagation eigenstates”. For our purpose, however,
the asymptotic behaviour of the modes ψk , ξk can be simply obtained (modulo logarithmic
corrections) by inserting into the previous system the power-law ansatz

                             ψk = A(−η)x ,          ξk = B(−η)x .                     (4.33)

For the background solution (4.24) one then finds that there are, in the |kη| → 0 limit,
non-trivial solutions for the coefficients A and B only if x = 0 or x = −2. This means that,
asymptotically,
                                       A2                        B2
                          ψk = A1 + 2 ,               ξ k = B1 + 2 ,                   (4.34)
                                       η                          η
and the amplitude is not frozen, unlike in the standard inflationary scenario. Because of the
growing mode, ψk ∼ η −2 , the scalar perturbation amplitude blows up in the limit η → 0− .
Otherwise stated, at any given time η there is always a low enough frequency band for
which the typical fluctuations have a dimensionless amplitude much larger than 1 [115] (see
Eq. (4.75) in the next subsection). This breaks the validity of the linear approximation
and is not consistent, in general, with the perturbative expansion around a homogeneous
background.
    This conclusion cannot be avoided, be it by moving to a different frame (as discussed
in the previous subsection), or by changing the number of dimensions, since the previous
result is dimensionality-independent. For a d = 3 isotropic background, in particular, one
finds in the longitudinal gauge ϕ = ψ, and the Fourier modes ∇2 ψk = −k2 ψk satisfy the
Bessel equation
                                        3
                                  ψk′′ + ψk′ + k2 ψk = 0                            (4.35)
                                        η

                                             77
(from Eq. (4.32)). The exact solution, in the limit |kη| → 0, has the asymptotic expansion
[5]
                                                      c2
                                   ϕk = c1 ln |kη| + 2                              (4.36)
                                                      η
(c1 , c2 are integration constants), with the same growing mode ∼ η −2 as in higher dimen-
sions.
   It is important to point out, however, that such a growing mode is absent for tensor
metric perturbations. If we consider the tensor perturbation equation (4.21), in the same
background (4.24), we obtain indeed for each Fourier mode the Bessel equation
                                         1
                                   h′′k + h′k + k2 hk = 0,                             (4.37)
                                         η
with the asymptotic solution

                            hk = c1 + c2 ln |kη|,     |kη| → 0− .                      (4.38)

All modes tend to stay constant, asymptotically, modulo a logarithmic growth that can be
easily kept under control if the phase of accelerated evolution is not infinitely extended in
the high-curvature regime but is bounded, for instance, by the Planck (or string) scale (as
expected).
    This is a first signal that the growing mode of scalar perturbations, appearing in the
longitudinal gauge, might be a pure gauge effect, i.e. an artefact of the particular choice
of coordinate system. This suspicion is confirmed by the application of the “fluid flow”
approach [368, 433] to the perturbations of a scalar-tensor background. In this approach,
the evolution of density and curvature inhomogeneities can be described in terms of covariant
scalar variables, which are gauge-invariant to all orders [112].
    Let us consider, for simplicity, the isotropic case d = 3, n = 0. There are two covariant
variables, ∆ and C, defined in terms of the momentum density of the scalar field ∇φ, of the
spatial curvature (3) R, and of their derivatives. By expanding around the dilaton-driven
background (4.24), which in our case reduces to
                                           √
         a = (−η)1/2 ,              φ = − 3 ln(−η),              − ∞ < η < 0,          (4.39)

one finds for such variables, in the linear approximation, the asymptotic solution (|kη| ≪ 1)
[115]:
                        ∆k = const,            ck = const + Ak ln |kη|.                 (4.40)
Such variables tend to stay constant outside the horizon, with at most a logarithmic vari-
ation (as in the tensor case), which is not dangerous. Indeed, in terms of ∆ and C, the
amplitude of density and curvature fluctuations can be consistently computed using the lin-
ear approximation (for all modes), and their spectral distribution (normalized to an initial
vacuum spectrum, see the next subsection) turns out to be exactly the same as the tensor
spectral distribution (4.38), which is bounded.

                                              78
    The same result, on the other hand, can also be directly obtained in the longitudinal
gauge simply by neglecting the growing mode of Eq. (4.36), as noted in [321]. This suggests
that it should be possible to move to a more appropriate gauge, in which the growing mode
is suppressed, to restore the validity of the linear approximation.
   This is exactly what happens in the off-diagonal gauge (also called “uniform-curvature”
gauge [381]), defined by ψ = 0 = E,
                                  h                                   i
                         ds2 = a2 (1 + 2ϕ) dη 2 − dx2i − 2∂i Bdxi dη ,                     (4.41)

which represents another complete choice of coordinates, with no residual degrees of free-
dom (just as the longitudinal gauge). In this gauge there are two variables for scalar
perturbations, ϕ and B, and the perturbation equations are solved, asymptotically, by
                                                                 c2
                     ϕk = c1 + c2 ln |kη|,    Bk = c1 η ln |kη| + .                 (4.42)
                                                                 η
The growing mode is thus completely absent for homogeneous perturbations (since it is
∂i B that contributes to the perturbed metric). The growing mode is still present in the
off-diagonal part of the metric for non-homogeneous perturbations, but it is suppressed with
respect to the longitudinal gauge, since δ(1) g ∼ kBk ∼ kηψk ∼ η −1 , instead of ψk ∼ η −2 .
The lower is k the stronger is the suppression, and this is enough for the linear approximation
to be valid, as explicitly checked with a computation up to second-order corrections [115].
This off-diagonal gauge is in general useful for the study of scalar perturbations also in the
context of generalized scalar-tensor models of gravity and of the higher-loop string effective
action, as discussed for instance in [383].
    Even better, one may choose a gauge in which ψ = 0 = B. In this gauge, E is related
to the Bardeen potential Ψ by E ∼ η 2 Ψ, according to Eq. (4.29). On the other hand, the
gauge-invariant Bardeen potential evolves asymptotically (in all gauges) like the longitu-
dinal variable ψ, i.e. like η −2 . Since E enters the metric perturbations with two spatial
derivatives, it follows that, in this gauge, δ(1) gij ∼ (kη)2 Ψk , which is asymptotically frozen,
and sufficiently small (at small |kη|) for the linear approximation to be valid.
    To conclude this subsection, let us stress that the asymptotic growth of perturbations is
a typical problem of string cosmology, with no counterpart in the standard inflationary sce-
nario. Consider, for instance, a d = 3, conformally flat and accelerated background, which
can be conveniently parametrized in the negative range of the conformal time coordinate
by a generic power-law scale factor, as follows:

                                  a = (−η)α ,              η < 0.                          (4.43)

For α ranging over the whole real axis we can represent in this way all classes of inflationary
backgrounds introduced in Section 1.3, and reported in Table 1. Consider then the E-frame
perturbation equation (4.21), which in this case reduces to the Bessel equation
                                               2α ′
                                      h′′k +     h + k2 hk = 0,                            (4.44)
                                                η k

                                                   79
               α = −1                 de Sitter                    ȧ > 0, ä > 0, Ḣ = 0

               α < −1              power-inflation                 ȧ > 0, ä > 0, Ḣ < 0

             −1 < α < 0             superinflation                 ȧ > 0, ä > 0, Ḣ > 0

                α>0            accelerated contraction             ȧ < 0, ä < 0, Ḣ < 0


      Table 1: Four classes of accelerated backgrounds, parametrized by a = (−η)α .



with asymptotic solution (for |kη| → 0):
                                          Z η
                                                 dη ′
                          hk = A + B                      = A + B |η|1−2α .                 (4.45)
                                                a2 (η ′ )

The amplitude tends to stay constant for α < 1/2, while it tends to grow for α > 1/2 (for
α = 1/2 the growth is simply logarithmic). In the E-frame the growing mode thus appears
only for a phase of accelerated contraction (see Table 1), and it is absent in the standard
inflationary context where the background is always expanding (even in the E-frame).
    In the pre-big bang scenario, on the contrary, the comoving amplitude of metric fluctu-
ations may be growing, in the standard gauges, even in the case of tensor perturbations. In
some cases the validity of the linear approximation may be restored in an appropriate gauge,
as for the scalar case discussed in this subsection. If this is impossible, the growth of per-
turbations is a physical effect, signalling a (quantum) instability of the given background
[406, 408]. In any case, however, the energy spectrum of the perturbations can always
be consistently estimated by truncating the comoving amplitude to the frozen part of the
asymptotic solution [118]. This is a consequence of a duality property of the perturbation
equations that will be discussed in Subsection 4.5.


4.3   Canonical variables and normalization

The linearized equations for the classical evolution of the perturbations have been obtained,
in the previous subsection, by perturbing directly (to first order) the equations of motion of
the background fields. The same equations, however, can also be obtained with a different
approach, by expanding the action up to terms quadratic in the first-order fluctuations:
                                                                              2 
                        g → g + δ(1) g,              δ(2) S ≡ S        δ(1) g          .    (4.46)



                                                   80
The variation of the perturbed action with respect to δ(1) g gives in fact a set of linearized
equations, identical to Eqs. (4.3).
    This second method is longer, in general, but has an advantage: the diagonalization of
the quadratic perturbed action δ(2) S defines the “normal modes” of oscillation for the total
system formed by the metric plus the matter sources. The so-called normal modes are the
variables that diagonalize the kinetic part of the action and that, once quantized, satisfy
canonical commutation relations [492]. They are required to normalize the initial amplitude
of the perturbations to a quantum spectrum of zero-point (vacuum) fluctuations, and to
study their amplification in the course of the cosmological evolution.
    Let us illustrate this point starting with the case of tensor metric perturbations. The
second-order action for tensor perturbations in a cosmological background was first written
in [260], in the E-frame and in d = 3 dimensions (see also [492, 16]). Such a result can be
easily generalized to the S-frame [277] and to the (d + 1)-dimensional, Bianchi-I-type metric
background used in the previous subsections, starting from the unperturbed, low-energy
gravidilaton string effective action (in units 2λd−1
                                                 s   = 1):
                                       Z                 h           i
                                                   √
                                 S=−       dd+n+1 x −ge−φ R + (∂µ φ)2 ,                                          (4.47)

and considering the transverse, trace-free variable hµν , defined by the first-order perturba-
tion (4.10). As already discussed, the fluctuations of the d-dimensional external space are
conveniently described in the synchronous gauge of Eq. (4.11). In this gauge, we expand
to order h2 the controvariant components of the metric,

                             δ(1) gµν = −hµν ,                 δ(2) gµν = hµα hα ν ,                             (4.48)

the volume density,
                             √                          √       1√
                         δ(1) −g = 0,               δ(2) −g = −    −ghµν hµν ,                                   (4.49)
                                                                4
and so on for δ(1) Rµν , δ(2) Rµν (see [277] for the details of the explicit computation). The
                                                                √
second-order perturbed action has then contributions from −g, R and g µν :
                             Z                  "                                                        #
                 (2)             d+n+1     −φ       (2)   √             (2)   √        µν           
             δ         S=−       d       xe     δ             −gR + δ              −gg ∂µ φ∂ν φ              .   (4.50)

Integrating by parts, using the unperturbed equations of motion, and neglecting total deriva-
tive terms, we finally arrive at the quadratic action:
                                       Z                                                     !
                                  1                                                 ∇
                         δ(2) S =          dd+n+1 xad bn e−φ         ḣji ḣij + hji 2 hij       .               (4.51)
                                  4                                                 a

Decomposing the fluctuations of the d-dimensional spatial metric into the two physical
polarization modes h+ , h× ,                        
                                hji hij = 2 h2+ + h2× ,                         (4.52)

                                                          81
and introducing the conformal time coordinate dη = adt, we eventually obtain,for each
mode, the effective scalar action
                                               Z                                          !
                                (2)        1             d−1 n −φ      ′2           2
                            δ         Sh =         dηa      b e      h + h∇ h ,                           (4.53)
                                           2

where h is now a scalar variable standing for either of the polarization amplitudes h+ , h× .
The variation with respect to h now gives exactly Eqs. (4.17), i.e. the S-frame tensor
perturbation equation (the sameas was obtained by direct perturbation of the equations of
motion).
    The above action describes a scalar field non-minimally coupled to a time-dependent
external field (also called “pump field”), represented in this case by the dilaton and by the
internal and external scale factors (the so-called “moduli”). In order to impose the correct
normalization to a quantum spectrum of vacuum fluctuations we need, however, the canon-
ical variable that diagonalizes the kinetic part of the action and describes asymptotically a
freely oscillating field [212, 352, 492]. In our case such a variable u is defined by [299]

                                u = zh,                    z = a(d−1)/2 bn/2 e−φ/2 .                      (4.54)

In fact, for each Fourier mode uk , we get from Eq. (4.53), after integration by parts, an
effective action in which the kinetic term appears in the standard canonical form:
                                               Z                                                  !
                                         1                                     z   ′′
                          (2)
                      δ         Su (k) =           dη    |u′k |2 − k2 |uk |2 +          |uk | 2
                                                                                                      ,   (4.55)
                                         2                                      z

and which leads to the canonical evolution equation:
                                      h            i                                       z ′′
                          u′′k + k2 − V (η) uk = 0,                         V (η) =             ,         (4.56)
                                                                                            z
with an effective potential V (η) depending only on the external pump field. An accelerated
background, in particular, has an effective potential that goes to zero as η → −∞. We thus
obtain, asymptotically, the free-field equation

                                      u′′k + k2 uk = 0,              η → −∞,                              (4.57)

and the variable uk can be normalized to an initial-vacuum fluctuation spectrum,
                                            1
                                      uk = √ e−ikη ,                  η → −∞,                             (4.58)
                                            2k
                                                                            ′
so as to satisfy canonical commutation relations [uk1 , u∗k2 ] = iδk1 k2 . The normalization of
the canonical variable uk automatically fixes the normalization of the metric fluctuations,
hk = uk /z.
    It is important to stress that the procedure used to introduce the diagonalized action
(4.55) can be exactly repeated in the E-frame. The only difference in this new frame is that

                                                           82
there is no dilaton coupling e−φ in front of the Lagrangian density, and the pump field is
simply determined by the E-frame scale factors, ze = ψ/e h
                                                         e =ae(d−1)/2e
                                                                     bn/2 . But, according to
                                                                 ′′
the transformation rule (4.22), ze = z. The effective potential z /z is thus the same in the
two frames, the time evolution of ψ and ψe is the same and, as a consequence, we find the
same spectrum in both frames, as anticipated in Subsection 4.1.
     In the case of scalar metric perturbations, the computations are more complicated, in
practice, but the procedure is exactly the same in principle. The scalar canonical variable
has been computed for a d = 3 isotropic background coupled to various types of sources:
a perfect fluid [455, 159], one scalar field [554, 490, 571], two scalar fields [213], N scalar
fields [28]. Working in the E-frame (and omitting the “tilde”, for simplicity) the scalar per-
turbation of the gravidilaton action (4.8) can be easily performed in the longitudinal gauge,
where δ(1) φ = χ, δ(1) g00 = 2a2 ϕ, δ(1) gij = 2a2 ψδij . One then obtains the diagonalized
second-order action [492]:
                                                        Z                                                   !
                                                    1                                  z       ′′
                                     (2)
                                 δ         Sv (k) =         dη   |vk′ |2 − k2 |vk |2 +                  2
                                                                                                    |vk |       ,                    (4.59)
                                                    2                                         z

where the canonical variable v is defined by

                                                                                          a2 φ′
                                              v = aχ + zψ,                           z=         ,                                    (4.60)
                                                                                           a′
and is gauge-invariant, as can be explicitly checked by using the infinitesimal transforma-
tions (4.28).
    This result can be easily generalized to the scalar fluctuations of the higher-dimensional,
anisotropic background considered in the previous subsections, and parametrized as in Eq.
(4.25). After the diagonalization, the higher-dimensional action for the Fourier modes of
scalar perturbations can be written as [300]
                             Z                                                                                                   !
                         1                                        z   ′′                                    z       ′′
        (2)
    δ         Sv,w (k) =         dη         |vk′ |2 − k2 |vk |2 +          |vk |2
                                                                                    + |wk′ |2 − k2 |wk |2 +                  2
                                                                                                                         |wk |       (4.61)
                         2                                         z                                                z

(modulo a total derivative that does not contribute to the equations of motion). There are
two gauge-invariant canonical variables, v and w, which in the longitudinal gauge (E = 0 =
B) are defined by
                                                                                                 
                                                                                         n
                                            v = a(d−1)/2 bn/2 χ + z ψ +                     ξ
                                                                                        d−1
                                                                                                         
                                                n(n + d − 1) 1/2 a′       b′
                                            w=z                      ξ −     ψ ,                                                     (4.62)
                                                  (d − 1)        aφ′     bφ′
with the generalized pump field

                                                             a(d−1)/2 bn/2 φ′
                                                        z=     a′     nb′
                                                                              .                                                      (4.63)
                                                               a + (d−1)b


                                                                   83
    The definition of the canonical variable and the correct normalization of the pertur-
bations are necessary ingredients to study the growth of the quantum fluctuations, and
to determine whether they backreaction may become eventually so large as to destroy the
initial homogeneity of a pre-big bang solution (see also Section 3). It is the canonical
normalization, in particular, that leads to the standard relation between the amplitude of
quantum fluctuations and the curvature scale of the background geometry.
    In order to illustate this important point let us consider tensor perturbations in a d = 3,
isotropic, E-frame metric, evolving in time aymptotically according to Eq. (4.45). The
classical perturbation equation (4.44) only determines the time dependence of the fluctu-
ations. The canonical action, however, determines not only the k-dependence through the
normalization of uk , but also the correct canonical dimensions of the fluctuations, [u] = M .
By inserting in fact the required dimensional factors in the (E-frame) perturbed action,
                                                 Z                          !
                               (2)          1             2    ′2       2
                           δ         Sh =            dηa       h + h∇ h ,                (4.64)
                                          32πG

we obtain the scalar field action (4.55) with canonical dimensions by setting, for each Fourier
mode,                                           √
                                                  2 uk (η)
                                       hk (η) =                                          (4.65)
                                                MP a(η)
(recall that 8πG = MP−2 with our conventions).
   The typical fluctuation amplitude over a comoving length scale r, on the other hand, is
determined by the two-point correlation function

                                        ξ(~r) = hh(~x)h(~x + ~r)i,                       (4.66)

where the brackets denote either a quantum expectation value, if we work in the formal-
ism in which the perturbations are quantized and expanded into annihilation and creation
operators (see Subsection 4.4), or a macroscopic ensemble averaged over a spatial volume,
if we work in the classical limit. In any case we consider real perturbations (hk = h∗−k ),
satisfying the isotropy condition (i.e. |hk | is a function of k = |~k| only) and the stochastic
condition
                           hh(~k)h(−~k′ )i = (2π)3 δ3 (k − k′ )|h(k)|2                    (4.67)
(which is a consequence of their quantum origin). An explicit computation then gives
[492, 278]                           Z
                                       dk sin kr
                              ξ(r) ∼             |δh (k)|2 ,                  (4.68)
                                       k kr
where |δh (k)| represents the typical, dimensionless amplitude of tensor fluctuations over a
comoving length scale r = k−1 :
                                                           h        i
                               |δh (k)| ≡ k3/2 |hk | ∼ ξ 1/2 (r)              .          (4.69)
                                                                     r=k −1


                                                     84
    The amplitude of the quantum fluctuations of the metric is now fixed by Eq. (4.65)
and by the normalization of the canonical variable, Eq. (4.58). Initially, for η → −∞, all
fluctuations oscillate inside the horizon, and
                                                     k    ω
                                       |δh (k)| =       =    ,                                             (4.70)
                                                    aMP   MP

i.e. the amplitude of a mode is proportional to its proper frequency ω = k/a (and then it
is adiabatically decreasing, in an expanding background). In the opposite regime η → 0− ,
where the fluctuations are well outside the horizon of an inflationary background with
a ∼ |η|α , we have to use the asymptotic solution (4.45), and we may distinguish three
possibilities.

   • If α < 1/2, then h is frozen, while the canonical variable grows adiabatically, following
     the growth of the pump field z = a (see Eq. (4.45)): uk ∼ a(uk /a)hc , where “hc”
     denotes the time of horizon crossing, |kη| ≃ 1). The final amplitude can thus be
     expressed in terms of the background curvature scale at the crossing time |η| ≃ 1/k:
                                                                                      
                          k           1                       H                     H1
              |δh (k)| ≃        ≃           ≃                               =                |kη1 |1+α ,   (4.71)
                         MP ahc   MP (aη)hc                   MP       hc           MP

     where H1 is some reference scale (a convenient choice is the final curvature scale at
     the end of the inflationary phase), and α is the conformal power of the scale factor.
     The spectral amplitude δh is frozen in time, and it is then clear from the above
     equation why pre-big bang models, characterized by a growing (in time) curvature
     scale (α + 1 > 0, see Table 1), are associated to a growing (in frequency) tensor
     perturbation spectrum.

   • If α > 1/2, then h is growing according to Eq. (4.45) and, as a consequence, the
     spectral amplitude δh grows not only in frequency but also in time:
                                                             
                                                        H
                                       |δh (k)| ≃                     |kη|1−2α .                           (4.72)
                                                        MP      hc


   • The low-energy, dilaton-driven pre-big bang solution of Eq. (4.39) corresponds to
     the limiting case α = 1/2. In that case the amplitude of tensor perturbations only
     acquires a mild, logarithmic dependence [115, 116]:
                                                                         
                                       H                              H1
                      |δh (k)| ≃                 | ln |kη|| =            |kη1 |3/2 | ln |kη||,             (4.73)
                                       MP   hc                        MP

     which is under control for inflation scales smaller than Planckian, H1 < MP .

   It is important to stress that the behaviour of scalar fluctuations, in the background
with α = 1/2, is apparently very different from the tensor one, as already discussed in


                                                     85
the previous subsection. By eliminating the dilaton fluctuation χ, and using the scalar
perturbation equations, one finds indeed that the scalar longitudinal variable ψ is related
to the canonical variable v of Eq. (4.60) by [492]:
                                                                             ′
                                                           φ′            vk
                                              ψk = −                               .                                (4.74)
                                                         4MP k2          a
The normalized amplitude of scalar quantum fluctuations,
                                                                                         
                                3/2                     H            −2                H1
                 |δψ (k)| ≡ k            |ψk | ≃                  |kη|        =                 |kη1 |3/2 ||kη|−2
                                                        MP   hc                        MP
                                      2
                          H1        η1
                 =                            |kη1 |−1/2 ,                                                          (4.75)
                          MP        η

is thus unbounded since, for any |η| > |η1 |, we can always find a frequency band |kη1 | ≪ 1
for which |δψ | is arbitrarily large.
     By using the correct quantum normalization, however, it is now easy to check that this
difficulty disappears in the off-diagonal gauge [115], where the off-diagonal perturbation
variable B satisfies Bk ∼ kηψk and the amplitude of the corresponding quantum fluctuations
is controlled by                                       
                                                     H1   η1
                         |δB (k)| ∼ |kη||δψ (k)| ∼           |kη1 |1/2 .             (4.76)
                                                     MP   η
For the typical inflation scale of string cosmology, H1 ≃ Ms < MP , this amplitude stays
smaller than 1 for the whole duration of the pre-big bang phase, |η| > |η1 |, and for all modes
with k < k1 = |1/η1 | (higher-frequency modes are not amplified, see the next subsection). It
should be mentioned, however, that this conclusion does not apply to classical fluctuations,
whose initial amplitude is not constrained by the quantum normalization (4.58), and can
be fixed to much higher values (see a recent discussion in [128]).
     To conclude this subsection we note that the above procedure used to define the canon-
ical variables can also be applied to more complicated models, and in particular to the
actions including the higher-derivative corrections typical of the “stringy”, high-curvature
regime [482, 140], appearing towards the end of the phase of pre-big bang evolution. To
first-order in α′ , and in the S-frame, such an action can be parametrized as [307]
                  Z                                                                                        
                      d4 x √    −φ            µ     α′ h 2            µ 2
                                                                          i
             S=              −ge   −R − ∂µ φ∂   φ +     R GB − (∂µ φ∂  φ)   ,                                       (4.77)
                      2λ2s                          4

where RGB2       2
            ≡ Rµναβ       2 + R2 is the Gauss–Bonnet invariant (see Section 8.2 for further
                     − 4Rµν
details). Starting with Eq. (4.77), the second-order perturbed action for each polarization
mode of tensor fluctuations becomes [277], in conformal time,
                                                Z            h                                     i
                                          1
                          δ(2) Sh =                 d3 xdη z 2 (η)h′2 + y 2 (η)h∇2 h ,                              (4.78)
                                         4λ2s



                                                             86
where
                                                                         ′       
                                     2            −φ       2         ′a       ′
                                 z (η) = e                 a −α               φ       ,
                                                                      a
                                                                                                     
                                                                                          ′′    a′ ′
                                 y 2 (η) = e−φ a2 + α′ φ′2 − φ +                                  φ              (4.79)
                                                                                                a

(the inequality of the two pumping fields z and y, which prevents factorization, is a conse-
quence of the breaking of the scale-factor duality symmetry, to this order in α′ ; see [476] for
                                                                                          √
an action with α′ corrections, which preserves scale-factor duality). By setting u = zh/ 2λs
we get the action in canonical form,
                                              Z                       ′′
                                                                                                   !
                               (2)        1             z    y2
                           δ         Sh =         dη u + u2 + 2 u∇2 u ,
                                                               ′2
                                                                                                                 (4.80)
                                          2              z   z

and the corresponding perturbation equation
                       h                  i                                               z
                                                                                           ′′
                                                                                              k2
                 u′′k + k2 − Vk (η) uk = 0,                          Vk (η) =                − 2 (y 2 − z 2 ),   (4.81)
                                                                                           z  z
looks the same as Eq. (4.56), with the only difference that the effective potential is now,
in general, k-dependent. The above equation takes into account (to first order) higher-
curvatures effects on the perturbation spectrum [277], and provides the starting point for
studying the evolution of tensor perturbations in the high-curvature regime typical of the
pre-big bang scenario [148]. A similar approach has been developed for the study of scalar
and vector fluctuations including α′ corrections [150].


4.4     Spectral distribution of the energy density

For all types of perturbations the evolution in time of the canonical modes uk is described by
the Schrödinger-like equation (4.56), with an effective potential that depends on the pump
field, and thus on the peculiar kinematics of the given background. For all inflationary
backgrounds, however, such a potential tends to vanish, asymptotically, at large positive
and negative values of the conformal time.
     Consider, for instance, the evolution of tensor perturbations in the E-frame: the pump
field is the scale factor, z = a, and V = a′′ /a. For a typical inflationary scenario the
background is initially accelerated, parametrized by a power-law scale factor, a ∼ |η|α , so
that |V | ∼ η −2 for η → −∞; at large times the background eventually evolves into the
standard radiation-dominated era, a ∼ η, so that V = 0 for η → +∞. The analysis of
perturbations thus reduces to a problem of scattering of the “wave function” uk , induced
by a potential V (η), which is asymptotically vanishing (see Fig. 4.1).
   The important difference between the present problem and an ordinary scattering prob-
lem, however, is that the differential variable of Eq. (4.56) is time, not space. As a con-


                                                                87
sequence, the oscillation frequencies represent energies, not momenta. With an initial nor-
malization to a state of positive energy,
                                e−ikη
                           uin ≃ √ ,                               η → −∞,                   (4.82)
                                   2
the final state is thus in general a superposition of positive and negative energy modes,

                       uout ≃ c+ e−ikη + c− e+ikη ,                    η → +∞.               (4.83)

In the context of quantum field theory, it is well known that such a mixing represents a
process of pair creation from the vacuum [90]. The so-called Bogoliubov coefficients c±
parametrize the unitary transformation connecting the set of |ini and |outi annihilation
and creation operators:

                           {uin , bk , b†k } =⇒ {uout , ak , a†k },
                           ak = c+ bk + c∗− b†−k ,        a†−k = c− bk + c∗+ b†−k ,          (4.84)

and define the expectation number of pairs produced from the vacuum in the mode k:

             nin (k) = h0|b†k bk |0i = 0,       nout (k) = h0|a†k ak |0i = |c− (k)|2 6= 0.   (4.85)

    In a second quantization language, the amplification of perturbations can thus be de-
scribed as a process of particle production or, equivalently, as the evolution of the initial
vacuum into a final “squeezed” vacuum state [351, 352, 354, 355],

                                       |0i =⇒ |Sk i = Σk |0i,                                (4.86)

generated by the two-mode squeezing operator [565]
                                                                     
                                 Σk = exp s∗k bk b−k − sk b†k b†−k .                         (4.87)

Here sk = rk e2iθk is the so-called squeezing parameter, whose modulus and phase are related
to the Bogoliubov coefficients c± (k) by [565]

                       c+ (k) = cosh rk ,                 c− (k) = e2iθk sinh rk .           (4.88)

    Itshould be noted that the squeezed-state formalism is particularly convenient for the
analysis of the statistical properties of the produced radiation, and for the study of the
entropy growth associated to particle production. Representing the effective decoherence of
the squeezed density matrix through a suitable “coarse-graining” procedure, which accounts
for the loss of information associated to (averaged) macroscopic observations, one finds
indeed that the entropy growth associated to particle production, for each mode k, is given
by ∆Sk = 2rk [297, 298]. In the large squeezing limit, summing over all modes, the total
entropy inside a proper volume V = (aL)3 can then be estimated as
                                Z                              Z
                       S≃V          dωω 2 ln |c− (ω)|2 = V         dωω 2 ln n(ω),            (4.89)


                                                     88
                                              |Re uk(h)|2




                                                  5
                            uin                                            uout


                                  -40   -20                 20      40




                          uin = e-ik                  uout = c+e-ik       c- e+ik



Figure 4.1: Parametric amplification of the vacuum fluctuations, illustrated by the quali-
tative evolution of the canonical variable. The plot of the real part of uk (thin curve) has
been obtained through a numerical integration of the canonical perturbation equation for a
step-like effective potential (bold curve), exponentially damped in the inflationary region.


in agreement with different approaches to the same problem [106, 107], and with different
definitions of quantum (von Neumann) and informatic (Shannon–Wehrl) entropy [301]. For
a growing, power-law spectral distribution n(ω), typical of pre-big bang models, one obtains
a constant entropy per comoving volume, S ∼ (aω1 )3 , where ω1 is the maximal amplified
frequency inside the given volume. This result has useful applications to the problem of the
graceful exit, as will be discussed in Section 8.4.
    In a semiclassical language, the amplification of perturbations can be represented instead
as a parametric amplification [348, 570] of the wave function uk , i.e. as an “antitunnelling”
process [278] in which the positive frequency part of the |outi mode (4.83) plays the role
of the wave incident (from the right) on the barrier and its negative part the role of the
reflected wave, while the |ini mode (4.82) plays the role of the transmitted wave (see Fig.
4.1). The Bogoliubov coefficient c− , which controls the number of produced particles, can
then be written as the ratio of the reflection and transmission coefficients, |c− |2 = R/T . In
the parametric amplification regime, characterized by a large number of produced particles
(nk ≫ 1), one finds |c− | ≃ |c+ |, so that R ≃ 1, and then

                                              |c− |2 ≃ T −1 .                           (4.90)

Hence the term antitunnelling.
    Quite independently of the adopted language, the energy density of the produced par-
ticles, for each mode k (summing over two polarization states), is given by

                                         d3 k
                          dρk = 2knk          ,                  nk = |c− (k)|2 .       (4.91)
                                        (2π)3


                                                      89
The computation of the spectral energy distribution per logarithmic interval of frequency,

                                      dρk      dρk  k4
                                            ≡k     = 2 |c− (k)|2 ,                         (4.92)
                                     d ln k    dk   π
thus requires the computation of the Bogoliubov coefficient c− (k). By recalling Eqs. (4.82),
(4.83), this amounts to solving the perturbation equation in the limit of large positive times,
with the initial normalization imposed at η = −∞.
   We will consider, as a simple example, a model of background characterized by two
phases: an initial accelerated evolution up to the time η1 , and a subsequent radiation-
dominated evolution for η > η1 :

                                      a ∼ (−η)α ,                  η < η1 ,
                                      a ∼ η,                       η > η1 .                (4.93)

In the first phase the canonical equation (4.56) for tensor perturbations reduces to a Bessel
equation,                                           
                                 ′′    2   α(α − 1)
                                uk + k −               uk = 0,                         (4.94)
                                               η2
with general solution [5]
                                h                              i
                 uk = |η|1/2 AHν(2) (|kη|) + BHν(1) (|kη|) ,             ν = |α − 1/2|,    (4.95)

         (1,2)
where Hν      are the first- and second-kind Hankel functions, of index ν = |α − 1/2| deter-
mined by the kinematics of the background (in this case, by the time evolution of the scale
factor; more generally, however, α parametrizes the evolution of the pump field in conformal
time). By using the large argument limit [5] for η → −∞,
                                s                                         s
                                      2 −ikη                                    2 +ikη
                 Hν(2) (kη) ∼             e  ,             Hν(1) (kη) ∼             e  ,   (4.96)
                                    π|kη|                                     π|kη|

we normalize the solution to a vacuum fluctuation spectrum,
                                           q
                                      A=       π/4,          B = 0.                        (4.97)

In the second phase V = 0, and we have the simple oscillating solution,
                                          1                     
                                    uk = √    c+ e−ikη + c− e+ikη .                        (4.98)
                                          2k

     The coefficients c± are now determined by the continuity of u and u′ at η = η1 . More
precisely, assuming a non-singular and continuous background, the matching would require
the continuity of the perturbed metric projected on a space-like hypersurface containing
η1 , and the continuity of the extrinsic curvature of that hypersurface [385, 214]; but in
many cases these conditions are equivalent to the continuity of the canonical variable u,

                                                      90
and of its first time derivative (see however [135]). Such a matching prescription might
require modifications, however, in the case of bouncing backgrounds [518] evolving from
contraction to expansion).
    When matching the solutions (4.95), (4.98), it is convenient to distinguish the two
regimes in which the comoving frequency k is much higher or much lower than the frequency
associated to the top of the effective potential barrier, |V (η1 )|1/2 ≃ |η1 |−1 . In the first case,
k ≫ 1/|η1 | ≡ k1 , we can use the large-argument limit of the Hankel functions to find that
there is no significant particle production, i.e.

                                    |c+ | ≃ 1,             |c− | ≃ 0.                              (4.99)

Actually, c− is not exactly zero, but it is exponentially suppressed [12, 264] as a function of
frequency, just like the quantum-mechanical reflection probability for a wave function with
a total energy well above the top of a potential barrier. Such an effect is, however, negligible
for the purpose of a first-approximation estimate in a cosmological context, and in any case
it only affects the shape of the very high-frequency tail of the spectrum. A sharp cut-off,
in that region, is a good enough approximation.
   In the second case, k ≪ 1/|η1 | ≡ k1 , we can use the small-argument limit of the Hankel
functions [5],

          Hν(2) ∼ a(kη1 )ν − ib(kη1 )−ν ,          Hν(1) ∼ a∗ (kη1 )ν + ib(kη1 )−ν ,              (4.100)

where a and b are dimensionless numbers of order 1, and we find

                                    |c+ | ≃ |c− | ≃ |kη1 |−ν−1/2 ,                                (4.101)

corresponding to a spectral distribution:
                                                          3−2ν
                      dρk    k4            k4         k
                            = 2 |c− (k)|2 ≃ 12                          ,           k < k1 .      (4.102)
                     d ln k  π             π          k1

   For a comparison with present observations it is convenient to use proper frequencies,
ω(t) = k/a(t), and to express the spectrum in units of critical energy density, ρc (t) =
3MP2 H 2 (t). We thus obtain the dimensionless spectral distribution
                                                                       3−2ν
                            ω dρ(ω)     ω4                         ω
                Ω(ω, t) =           ≃ 2 12 2                                    ,      ω < ω1 ,   (4.103)
                          ρc (t) dω  3π MP H                       ω1
where
                                       k1     1     H 1 a1
                                     ω1 =  ≃      ≃                               (4.104)
                                        a    aη1      a
is the maximal amplified frequency (approximately, the frequency “hitting” the top of
the potential barrier |V (η)|). Such a distribution can also be rewritten (modulo model-
dependent numerical factors) in the final useful form
                                                                   3−2ν
                                                               ω
                                  Ω(ω, t) ≃ g12 Ωγ (t)                      ,                     (4.105)
                                                               ω1

                                                 91
            Curvature scale                  Metric            Bessel index        Spectrum

                    H2                       a = |η|α              ν = |α − 1/2|   Ω ∼ ω 3−2ν

           de Sitter, constant               α = −1                 3 − 2ν = 0        flat

       power-inflation, decreasing           α < −1                 3 − 2ν < 0     decreasing

     pre-big bang inflation, growing         α > −1                 3 − 2ν > 0     increasing


             Table 2: Accelerated backgrounds and the slope of the spectrum.



where g1 = H1 /MP is the curvature scale at the transition epoch t1 (a fundamental param-
eter of the given cosmological model), and
                                                           2         4
                                            ργ         H1          a1
                                 Ωγ (t) =      =                                             (4.106)
                                            ρc         H           a

is the energy density (in critical units) of the radiation which becomes dominant at t = t1 ,
rescaled down to a generic time t.
    It is important to stress that the spectral slope 3− 2ν is directly related to the kinematic
behaviour of the background during the phase of accelerated evolution, as illustrated in
Table 2. In particular, the spectrum tends to follow the behaviour of the curvature scale.
In the standard inflationary scenario, represented by a phase of de Sitter-like evolution,
Ω does not depend on ω, and one obtains the so-called scale-invariant Harrison–Zeldovich
spectrum [364, 631]. For the low-energy, dilaton-driven phase typical of string cosmology
(the solution (4.39)) one has α = 1/2, and the corresponding spectrum Ω ∼ ω 3 simulates
the low-energy (Rayleigh–Jeans) tail of a thermal black-body distribution (see Subsection
5.2). Note, however, that a flat, scale-invariant spectrum with ν = 3/2 can also obtained
for α = 2, corresponding to a phase of contraction dominated by a cold “dust” source with
effective equation of state p = 0. This possibility, first pointed out in [273], was recently
discussed in [251] for the pre-big bang and ekpyrotic [412, 413] scenarios.
    It is also to be remarked that the above results for the spectrum have been obtained
by matching, as usual, the (perturbed) induced metric and the extrinsic curvature across
the hypersurface of constant total energy density, ρ + δρ = const. In the case of scalar
metric perturbations, this implies the continuity of the Bardeen potential Φ and of the
variable ζ = v/z (representing curvature perturbations), even for bouncing backgrounds
[384]. Performing the matching across different hypersurfaces may lead, however, to a dif-


                                                92
ferent spectrum of scalar perturbations (without changing the tensor spectrum), especially
in the case of transitions from a collapsing to an expanding phase, and in the case of non-
continuous backgrounds, as shown for a special case in [518] and discussed in general in [227]
(see Section 7 for possible applications of this effect to the scalar perturbation spectrum of
the pre-big bang scenario).
     It should be noted, finally, that the above procedure for an approximate determination
of the spectrum can be applied to any type of perturbation described by the canonical
equation (4.56). Also, it can be easily generalized to the case of n transition scales η1 , η2 ,
...ηn , for a background characterized by n phases, each of them approximated by a power-
law evolution with parameters α1 , α2 , ... , αn . In each of these phases we have a general
solution with Bessel index νi = |αi − 1/2|, i = 1, 2, ..., n. By matching u and u′ , using
the large-argument limit of the Hankel functions for modes above the potential barrier,
and the small-argument limit for modes below the barrier, we obtain a spectrum with n
different frequency bands. In each band, the slope of the spectrum is only determined by
the background kinematics of the two phases in which a given mode “hits” the barrier
and “re-enters” the horizon, respectively. The amplitude of the spectrum, on the contrary,
keeps track of the relative duration and kinematics of all phases during which the mode
stays “under the barrier” [278].
    By expanding the coefficients of the exact Bessel solutions (determined by the matching
conditions) at each transition scale |ηi | = ki−1 , and including the next-to-leading terms
when the leading ones are zero [135], we can also formulate a set of synthetic prescriptions
for a diagrammatic computation of the spectrum [210]. The method requires the drawing
of a simple plot in which we insert a vertical line corresponding to each transition, the
height of the line being proportional to the associated transition frequency, ki = |ηi |−1 . It
is thus possible to identify at a glance the various frequency bands of the spectrum, and the
knowledge of the various Bessel indices νi turns out to be sufficient to write down a quick
estimate of the various amplitudes and spectral distributions [210]. Such a computation can
also be made exact by including the full numerical coefficients in the asymptotic expansion
of the Hankel functions.


4.5   Duality of the perturbation equations

In the previous subsections we have applied the usual Lagrangian formalism to describe the
evolution in time of the perturbations, and their cosmological amplification. The Hamil-
tonian formalism, however, is more appropriate for the study of an interesting duality
symmetry which connects the amplitude of quantum fluctuations to their conjugate mo-
mentum, and which may be useful for estimating their energy–density spectrum [118] (see
also [616]).
   We shall assume, as discussed in Subsection 4.3, that the perturbations of the effective


                                              93
action leads to a quadratic Lagrangian density which, in the conformal-time gauge, can be
parametrized as
                                      1              
                                  L = z 2 ψ ′2 + ψ∇ψ ,                             (4.107)
                                      2
where z(η) is the pump field and ψ the comoving amplitude of the given fluctuations (see
for instance Eq. (4.53)). This Lagrangian may describe not only the (scalar and tensor)
metric perturbations, but also the quantum fluctuations of gauge fields and antisymmetric
tensors (see Section 7). By introducing the conjugate momentum
                                               δL
                                       π=           = z 2 ψ′ ,                          (4.108)
                                               δψ ′
we can define the corresponding Hamiltonian density, written in Fourier space as
                                   1 X  −2                     
                             H=         z |πk |2 + z 2 k2 |ψk |2 ,                      (4.109)
                                   2 k

where ψ−k = ψk∗ and π−k = πk∗ . The first-order perturbation equations then read, for each
mode,
                       ψk′ = z −2 π−k ,          πk′ = −z 2 k2 ψ−k ,               (4.110)
and lead to the decoupled equations
                          z′                                      z′
                  ψk′′ + 2 ψk′ + k2 ψk = 0 ,              πk′′ − 2 πk′ + k2 πk = 0.     (4.111)
                          z                                       z

   It is now easy to check that the transformation

                 πk → π
                      ek = kψk ,       ψk → ψek = −k−1 πk ,           z → ze = z −1     (4.112)

leaves the Hamiltonian, Poisson brackets, and equations of motion unchanged. It is a duality
transformation that reduces to the usual strong–weak coupling duality [561, 523, 556] in the
special case in which z = e−φ/2 ≡ gs−1 (as for the perturbations of heterotic, four-dimensional
gauge bosons [305, 306, 430], see Section 7), and to scale-factor duality [599, 580, 560] in the
special case in which z = a (as for tensor metric perturbations). In addition, in the case of
electromagnetic perturbations, the contribution of kψk to the Hamiltonian can be identified
with that of the magnetic field, whereas πk is proportional to the electric field: hence, in
that case, the transformation (4.112) exactly represents the well-known electric–magnetic
duality transformation.
    As a consequence of this duality property, the energy-density spectrum of the quantum
fluctuations can be consistently estimated by truncating the solution (outside the horizon)
to the frozen part of the fluctuations, even in backgrounds where the comoving amplitude
ψ grows with time and the growing modes dominate the spectrum. Only in a duality-
invariant context is such a truncation consistent, as the contribution to the Hamiltonian
of the growing mode of ψ is simply replaced by the contribution of the frozen part of its
duality-related conjugate momentum [118].

                                                  94
      In order to illustrate this important effect, it is convenient to introduce the new variables

                                      ψb = zψ,                 b = z −1 π,
                                                               π                                         (4.113)

which are canonically normalized and which transform as ψ, π under the duality transfor-
mation (4.112). Our Hamiltonian density (4.109) can then be written, formally1 , in a free
canonical form,
                                   1 X                     
                              H=         bk |2 + k 2 |ψbk |2 ,
                                        |π                                         (4.114)
                                   2 ~
                                             k
                    b π
where the variables ψ, b satisfy the Schrödinger-like equations of motion:
                   h               i                             h                     i
            ψbk ′′ + k2 − (z)′′ z −1 ψbk = 0 ,           bk ′′ + k 2 − (z −1 )′′ z π
                                                         π                         bk = 0,               (4.115)

characterized by two duality-related “effective potentials”, Vψ (z) = z ′′ /z and Vπ (z) =
z(z −1 )′′ = Vψ (ze).
   The initial evolution of perturbations, for all modes with k2 > {|VΨ |, |VΠ |}, can now be
described by the WKB-like approximate solutions of Eqs. (4.115):
                                                                                                  
                                           −1/4                Zη                        1/2
                       ψbk (η) = k − Vψ2
                                                     exp −i          dη   ′       2
                                                                                   k − Vψ          ,
                                                                 η0
                                                                                                   
                                                −1/4               Zη                     1/2
                       bk (η) = k k 2 − Vπ
                       π                                 exp −i          dη ′ k2 − Vπ              ,   (4.116)
                                                                     η0

which we have normalized to zero-point vacuum fluctuations, and where the extra factor of k
in the solution for π
                    bk is inserted for consistency with the first-order Hamiltonian equations.
We have ignored a possible relative phase in the solutions. Asymptotically, at η → −∞, we
have Vψ , Vπ → 0, and the solutions (4.116) reduce to the canonically normalized vacuum
fluctuations
                                e −ikη+iϕk                  √            ′
                      ψbk (η) =    √       ,       bk (η) = ke −ikη+iϕk ,
                                                   π                                   (4.117)
                                      k
where ϕk , ϕ′k are random phases, originating from the random initial conditions. The initial
state thus satisfies
                                   hz −2 π 2 i = hz 2 (∇ψ)2 i,                      (4.118)
where h· · ·i denotes ensemble average, or expectation value if perturbations are quantized.
Note that, because of the random phases, the initial state is duality-invariant only on the
average, in the sense of the above equation.
  1                                bb
    Equivalently, we can introduce ψ, π via a time-dependent canonical transformation and work with a
                       b
corrected Hamiltonian H.




                                                     95
    In the opposite regime, k2 < {|Vψ |, |Vπ |}, it is possible to write “exact” solutions to Eq.
(4.115) as follows [118],
                                      "                                #
                            b
                            ψk (η) = z Abk Tcos(z , z) + B
                                                 −1      bk Tsin(z , z) ,
                                                                  −1

                                                    "                                                               #
                                           bk Tcos(z, z −1 ) − A
                            bk (η) = kz −1 B
                            π                                  bk Tsin(z, z −1 ) ,                                                      (4.119)

where Abk , B
            b are arbitrary integration constants, and the functions Tcos(k, η), Tsin(k, η)
              k
satisfy
     h              i′  k                                             h                        i′       k
      Tcos(z −1 , z) = − 2 Tsin(z, z −1 ) ,                            Tsin(z −1 , z) =                    Tcos(z, z −1 ).              (4.120)
                        z                                                                               z2
They are defined through the following “ordered” expansions (see also [492]):
                                                        Zη                            Zη1
                       −1                                             −2
            Tcos(z          , z; k, η) = 1 − k                dη1 z        (η1 ) k           dη2 z 2 (η2 ) +
                                                        ηex                          ηex
                 Zη                           Zη1                          Zη2                          Zη3
                               −2                             2                          −2
            +k         dη1 z        (η1 ) k         dη2 z (η2 ) k                dη3 z        (η3 ) k         dη4 z 2 (η4 ) + · · · ;
                 ηex                      ηex                             ηex                       ηex
                                               Zη
            Tsin(z −1 , z; k, η) = k                 dη1 z −2 (η1 ) −
                                              ηex
                 Zη                           Zη1                          Zη2
                               −2                             2
            −k         dη1 z        (η1 ) k         dη2 z (η2 ) k                dη3 z −2 (η3 ) + · · · ,                               (4.121)
                 ηex                      ηex                             ηex

where, for matching purposes, a convenient choice of the time ηex , appearing as an arbitrary
lower limit of integration, is the horizon-exit time, such that |kηex | ≃ 1.
    Suppose now that the background, during the accelerated period, can be parametrized
by a power-law evolution of the pump field, i.e. z ∼ |η|α for η → 0− . From the general
solution (4.121) we obtain, in the limit |kη| ≪ 1,
                                                                                                                         
                           k|η| b                                                                     k|η| b
      ψbk = Abk |η|α +          Bk |η|−α ,                        πk = k B
                                                                  b       bk |η|−α −                       Ak |η|α ,                    (4.122)
                         1 − 2α                                                                     1 + 2α
with logarithmic corrections for α = ±1/2. The corresponding expansion for the comoving
amplitudes ψk , πk , is then
                                                                                                                    
                  ψk = Ak + Bk |η|1−2α ,                                   πk = k Bk − Ak |η|1+2α .                                     (4.123)

They may contain a growing mode, which leads in general to a growing Hamiltonian, and
then to a growing energy–density spectrum. The Hamiltonian, however, is always dominated
by a joint contribution of the frozen modes of ψk and πk . We may consider, in fact, three
possibilities.

                                                                    96
    • α > 1/2. The growing mode dominates ψk , while πk is frozen, as the constant mode
      is dominant (see Eq. (4.123)). Asymptotically, however, the Hamiltonian (4.114) is
      momentum-dominated, π  b 2 ≫ k 2 ψb2 , according to Eq. (4.122).

    • α < −1/2. The comoving amplitude ψk is frozen, while the growing mode dominates
      πk (see Eq. (4.123)). Asymptotically, however, the Hamiltonian (4.114) is dominated
                   b 2 ≪ k 2 ψb2 , according to Eq. (4.122).
      by ψk , i.e. π

    • −1/2 < α < 1/2. The comoving amplitude and the conjugate momentum are both
      frozen, so that
                                                         √
                                                  η α
                              kψbk = kzψk = k          ψk ∼ k|kη|α ,
                                                 ηhc
                                                         √
                                                 η −α
                              bk = kz −1 πk =
                              π                        πk ∼ k|kη|−α ,                 (4.124)
                                                ηhc
      and                                    n               o
                                         1
                                     Hk = Max πbk2 , k 2 ψbk2 .                       (4.125)
                                         2

Thus, for super-horizon wavelengths, the Hamiltonian density is always growing but, irre-
spectively of the value and sign of α, the joint contribution of the constant modes ψk ∼ Abk
and πk ∼ kB   b always provides an accurate estimate of the leading contribution to the
               k
canonical energy density, which can be written as
                                       "                          #
                             1 X 2 b 2 2α       b |2 |η|−2α .
                          H≃     k |Ak | |η| + |B k                                   (4.126)
                             2 k

     This estimate, based on the low-energy effective Lagrangian (4.107), could no longer
be appropriate when including α′ and loop corrections, typical of the high-curvature string
phase of pre-big bang models. Such corrections could indeed break the low-energy duality
symmetry. In that case, we cannot exclude that other modes in ψ and π will dominate the
Hamiltonian over the constant modes. In that case, however, the above estimate can be
applied as a lower bound on the total energy spectrum, provided the perturbation equations
still contain a frozen part in their asymptotic solutions, as shown, for instance, in the
example discussed in detail in [277].


5    Relic gravitons

One of the most firm predictions of all inflationary models is the amplification of the trace-
less, transverse part of the quantum fluctuations of the metric tensor, and the formation
of a stochastic background of relic gravitational waves [348, 570, 13, 585], distributed over
quite a large range of frequencies (see [13, 17] for a detailed discussion of the stochastic


                                             97
properties of such a background, and [353, 15] for a possible detection of the associated
“squeezing”).
    In this section we will apply the formalism and the results established in the previous
section to compute the possible spectral distributions of relic gravitons in the context of
the pre-big bang scenario. We will then estimate the maximal expected intensity (allowed
by phenomenological bounds and by model-dependent constraints) of such backgrounds
and discuss their possible detection by present (or near-future) gravitational antennas. For
additional studies of this aspect of the pre-big bang scenario we also refer the reader to
recent review papers, especially devoted to the primordial graviton background in string
cosmology [602, 278, 280, 289, 113, 463].


5.1   Phenomenological bounds on the graviton spectrum

As discussed in the previous section, the spectrum of the tensor perturbations of the metric,
amplified by inflation, contains various important parameters: the inflation scale H1 , the
slope 3 − 2ν, the end-point frequency ω1 . Such parameters are (partially) constrained by
the direct (or indirect) observational bounds existing at present on the energy density of
a primordial stochastic background of gravitational waves. To discuss the effects of such
bounds, let us recall, first of all, the gravitational spectrum expected in the context of the
standard inflationary scenario.
    In that context, the overall cosmological evolution can be approximated by a three-
phase model of background, in which the accelerated de Sitter (or quasi-de Sitter) epoch is
followed by the standard radiation-dominated and matter-dominated eras:

                de Sitter inflation,                     a ∼ (−η)−1 ,        η < η1 ,
                radiation domination,                    a ∼ η,         η1 < η < ηeq ,
                matter domination,                       a ∼ η2 ,       ηeq < η < η0 .    (5.1)

The effective potential appearing in the perturbation equation (4.56) is then characterized
by two transition scales, inflation → radiation at η ∼ η1 , and radiation → matter at η ∼ ηeq .
As a consequence, there are two different branches of the spectrum, corresponding to high-
frequency modes, |kηeq | > 1, that are affected by the first background transition only,
and low-frequency modes, |kηeq | < 1, that are affected by both transitions. Following the
procedure described in Section 4.4 we can easily compute the corresponding Bogoliubov
coefficients, and the resulting spectral energy distribution (4.105), evaluated at the present
time t0 , is [543, 243, 3]:
                                  2
                              H1
          ΩG (ω, to ) ≃                 Ωγ (t0 ),                        ωeq < ω < ω1 ,
                              MP
                                  2                  !−2
                              H1                  ω
                      ≃                 Ωγ (t0 )             ,           ω0 < ω < ωeq .   (5.2)
                              MP                 ωeq

                                                    98
    Here H1 is the curvature scale corresponding to the inflation → radiation transition,
                                                                         p
ω1 is the maximal amplified frequency, corresponding today to ω1 ≃ H1 /MP 1011 Hz;
ω0 is the minimal amplified frequency, corresponding to a mode crossing today the Hubble
horizon, ω0 ≃ 10−18 Hz; ωeq ≃ 102 ω0 is the frequency of a mode crossing the horizon at
the epoch of the radiation → matter transition (the maximal frequency affected by the
potential due to the matter era); finally, Ωγ (t0 ) ∼ 10−4 is the present fraction of critical
energy density in radiation.
    The expected distribution decreases like ω −2 between ω0 and ωeq ; it is flat (i.e. scale-
invariant) between ωeq and ω1 and then dies off exponentially for ω > ω1 . The position of
the spectrum in the (Ω, ω) plane is completely controlled by H1 , which is the only unknown
parameter in this simple example of inflationary model. The existing phenomenological
bounds able to constrain the position of the spectrum in the (Ω, ω) plane can thus constrain,
indirectly, the inflation scale H1 . At present, there are three main experimental bounds.
    A first bound follows from the analysis of the pulsar-timing data: there is at present no
detectable distortion of pulsar timing due to the influence of a cosmic graviton background,
at the frequency scale ωp ∼ 10−8 Hz. The present level of experimental sensitivity provides
the bound [404]
                                  < 10−8 ,
                         ΩG (ωp ) ∼                    ωp ∼ 10−8 Hz.                    (5.3)

    A second bound comes from the standard nucleosynthesis analysis [557]: the total inte-
grated energy density of the graviton background, at the epoch of nucleosynthesis, cannot
exceed, roughly, the energy density of one massless degree of freedom in thermal equilibrium
at that epoch. This gives a bound for the integrated spectrum [117],
             Z
     h2100                         < 0.5 × 10−5 ,
                 d ln ωΩG (ω, t0 ) ∼                      h2100 = H0 /(100 km s−1 Mpc−1 ),   (5.4)

which also applies to a possible peak of the spectrum, at all scales. Note, however, that the
above bound can be relaxed by about an order of magnitude if significant matter–antimatter
domains are present at the onset of nucleosynthesis, as recently pointed out in [337].
     A third bound (the most stringent one for flat or decreasing spectra) comes from the
COBE measurements [567, 77] of the large-scale CMB anisotropy. Those observations imply
that the contribution of a graviton background to the CMB anisotropy, at the horizon scale
ω0 , cannot exceed the upper bound
                                            
                                        ∆T
                                                               < 10−5 ,
                                                  ∼ |δh (ω0 )| ∼                             (5.5)
                                        T    ω0

where |δh (ω)| is the typical fluctuation amplitude (4.69) of tensor perturbations over a
proper length scale ω −1 . The spectral energy distribution, on the other hand, can be
expressed in terms of the amplitude δh by noting that, from the E-frame action (4.64) of
tensor perturbations, the average proper energy density of the background (summing over


                                                     99
polarizations) is given by
                                      dhEg i
                                    ρG =      = MP2 h|ḣ|2 i.                       (5.6)
                                      a3 d3 x
Using the Fourier expansion, the isotropy and the stochastic condition (4.67) for hk , we
finally obtain the relation [278]
                                                                   2
                                    d(hEg i/ρc )   1           ω
                      ΩG (ω, t) =    3 3
                                                 = 2 |δh (ω)|2           .               (5.7)
                                    a d x d ln ω  3π           ω0
The COBE bound can thus be rewritten as a condition on the graviton spectrum,
                                < 10−10 ,
                       ΩG (ω0 ) ∼                     ω0 ∼ 10−18 Hz.                     (5.8)

    A further, model-dependent bound can be obtained by considering the production of
primordial black holes [180, 181], that could be in principle closely related to the process
of graviton production. The process of black-hole evaporation, at the present epoch, is
constrained in fact by a number of astrophysical observations: the absence of evaporation
may thus impose an indirect upper limit on the graviton background. In a string cosmology
context the best upper limit obtained from primordial black holes turns out to be roughly of
                                                                   < 0.5× 10−5 [180], where
the same order as the nucleosynthesis bound (5.4), namely ΩG (ωs ) ∼
ωs is the maximal frequency amplified at the end of the low-energy dilaton-driven phase
(see the next subsection). It should be mentioned, finally, that another bound comparable
with the nucleosynthesis one, ΩG ∼ < 10−5 , and only valid however in the frequency range
10−8 – 10−16 Hz, is also obtained from present gravitational lensing experiments [54].
    Taking into account all significant bounds, the maximal allowed spectrum for the stan-
dard inflationary scenario is represented in Fig. 5.1 by the line labelled “de Sitter”. The
CMB isotropy bound (5.11) is the most significant one and, when imposed on the spectrum
(5.2), it implies [422, 522]
                                       H1 ∼< 10−5 MP .                                 (5.9)
Also shown in Fig. 5.1 are two possible spectra for the case in which the accelerated de
Sitter phase of Eq. (5.1) is replaced by a phase of power-law inflation, with a ∼ (−η)α ,
α < −1. In that case the spectrum is decreasing even for ω > ωeq (see Table 2), and the
isotropy bound on H1 becomes more and more stringent as the negative slope becomes
steeper and steeper [295, 299].
    The bound (5.9) on the final inflation scale thus applies to all models characterized by a
flat or decreasing energy spectrum. It may be evaded, however, if the spectrum is growing,
as in the context of the pre-big bang models that will be considered in the next subsection.


5.2   The graviton spectrum in minimal pre-big bang models

According to the pre-big bang scenario, the very early cosmological evolution starts from a
state approaching the string perturbative vacuum, goes through an initial low-energy phase

                                             100
                                                                             NUCLEOSYNTHESIS
                                     -5
                                                          PULSAR
                                           COBE




                          G h 100)
                                     -10




                         2
                                                           de Sitter
                                     -15




                          Log 10 (
                                                          powe
                                                              r-infla
                                     -20
                                                                     tion




                                            -18     -13     -8         -3      2     7     12

                                                            Log 10 (        /Hz)




       Figure 5.1: Expected graviton spectra in the standard inflationary scenario.

driven by the dilaton kinetic energy, and then necessarily reaches a purely “stringy” and
quantum regime of high curvatures and large couplings. In that regime, the perturbative
expansion of the string effective action becomes inappropriate (see Section 8), and the
details of the background kinematics become (with present understanding) uncertain and
strongly model-dependent; for the illustrative purposes of this subsection we shall assume
that, in spite of these uncertainties, it is still possible to parametrize the kinematics of the
string phase by a power-law evolution of the metric and of the dilaton field.
    Neglecting the final matter-dominated era, which only affects the low-energy tail of the
spectrum (and which is not very relevant to spectra that are growing very rapidly with
frequency), we are thus led to consider a simple class of pre-big bang models in which
the phase of accelerated evolution preceding the standard radiation era is divided into two
physically distinct regimes: an initial, low-energy, dilaton-dominated phase, and a late,
high-energy, string phase where α′ and loop corrections become important (see Section 8).
We shall denote by ηs the time scale marking the transition to the high-curvature string
phase and by η1 the time scale marking the transition to the radiation-dominated cosmology
(see Fig. 5.2), associated to a final curvature of order 1 in string units. In the E-frame we
may thus parametrize the following class of backgrounds:
                                                          √
      dilaton phase,           a ∼ (−η)1/2 ,        φ ∼ − 3 ln(−η),              η < ηs ,
      string phase,                        a ∼ (−η)α ,                      φ ∼ −2β ln(−η),        ηs < η < η1 ,
      radiation era,                       a ∼ η,                           φ = const,             η > η1 .
                                                                                                              (5.10)

The model seems to contain four parameters, α, β, η1 , ηs or, equivalently, the curvature
scales and coupling constants at the two transition epochs:

                         H1 ,                Hs ,         g1 = eφ1 /2 ,            gs = eφs /2 .              (5.11)

                                                             101
                                           Hs<< Ms                  H1~ Ms


                                           gs<< 1                    g1~ 1


                            lowest-order               'and loop             standard
                              action                 corrections             cosmology


                          dilaton-driven        s    string phase       1    radiation




                  Figure 5.2: A “minimal” model of pre-big bang background.

We may expect, however, that during the string phase the curvature scale stays controlled
by the fundamental string mass Ms ,

                                   Hstring phase ≃ Ms = eφ/2 MP ,                                        (5.12)

so that H keeps constant in the S-frame, while it grows (driven by the dilaton) in the
E-frame, where MP is a constant. This condition has two important consequences.
   The first is that the final curvature scale, H1 = g1 MP , turns out to be fixed by the
present value of the fundamental ratio between the string and the Planck mass [403]:

                                           Ms /MP ≃ 0.3 − 0.03.                                          (5.13)

The second is that, in the E-frame, according to the parametrization (5.10), we have
|Hs /H1 | = gs /g1 , so that
                                |η1 /ηs |β = |η1 /ηs |1+α ,                    (5.14)
i.e. β = 1 + α.
    Since H1 is fixed, and α and β are related, we are thus left with a “minimal” class of
pre-big bang models [116, 305], characterized by a two-dimensional parameter space. As
a convenient set of physical parameters we may choose, for instance, the duration of the
string phase in conformal time, zs = ηs /η1 , and the value of the string coupling gs (ηs ) at
the beginning of the high-curvature string phase.
    For such a background, the effective potential V (η) of Eq. (4.56) is characterized by
two transition scales, and the corresponding spectrum by two frequency bands, separated
by the limiting frequency ωs : we have in fact high-frequency modes with ω > ωs hitting
the barrier (or crossing the horizon) during the string phase, and low-frequency modes with
ω < ωs hitting the barrier during the dilaton phase. By applying the general procedure
illustrated in the previous section one then finds the following spectral distribution [116]:
                                                    
                                        ω 3−2ν
           ΩG (ω, to ) ≃ g12 Ωγ (t0 )          ,                                         ωs < ω < ω1 ,
                                        ω1
                                        2ν  3
                            2           ω1     ω
                         ≃ g1 Ωγ (t0 )            ,                                      ω < ωs          (5.15)
                                        ωs     ω1

                                                         102
(modulo logarithmic corrections, see Section 4.2). Such a spectrum has three important
properties.

   • The low-frequency band is characterized by a nearly thermal (i.e., Rayleigh–Jeans)
     behaviour, Ω ∼ ω 3 , that simulates the low-energy part of a black-body spectrum.

   • At high frequencies the slope is at most cubic, but in general flatter, as Ω ∼ ω 3−2ν ,
     with ν > 0.

   • The end-point values of the spectrum are approximately known, and fixed in terms
     of the fundamental ratio g1 = H1 /MP ≃ Ms /MP :
                                 1/2
                          ω1 ≃ g1 1011 Hz,               Ω(ω1 ) ≃ 10−4 g12 .            (5.16)

    The spectral behaviour of this class of backgrounds, computed by perturbing the lowest-
order string effective action, is expected to remain valid even when the α′ corrections are
included (to first order) in the perturbed action [277]: the spectrum remains the same,
only the amplitude is slightly modified, with no appreciable consequence for an order-
of-magnitude estimate (as confirmed also by recent numerical simulations, [148]). What
remains model-dependent, however, is the position of the break in the spectrum, determined
by the coordinates ωs and Ω(ωs ). For comparison with the standard predictions of the de
Sitter inflationary scenario, we have thus plotted in Fig. 5.3 three possible spectra, for
a graviton background of pre-big bang origin, corresponding to different durations of the
string phase, and to different slopes of the string branch of the spectrum.
    It should be mentioned that the full spectrum of tensor metric perturbations has re-
cently been computed for a regular class of minimal pre-big bang models, including in the
linearized perturbation equations also the contributions from the higher-derivative and loop
corrections needed for a smooth transition to the post-big bang regime [148]. It has been
checked, in such a context, that the spectrum of the low-frequency modes ω < ωs , crossing
the horizon in the low-curvature regime, is unaffected by the higher-order corrections. Also,
it has been explicitly confirmed that the “string branch” of the spectrum (ω > ωs ) is flatter
than at low frequency, and that its amplitude can be reliably estimated also by means of
the low-energy perturbation equation. It has been found, however, that if the transition
to the post-big bang regime goes through a phase described by the fixed-point solutions of
the (first order in α′ ) truncated string effective action (see Subsection 8.3), then the slope
of the string branch of the spectrum is at least quadratic, i.e. still too steep for a possible
detection by present gravitational antennas (see Subsection 5.4).
    In any case, the graviton spectrum of the minimal pre-big bang scenario is monotonically
growing and, as a consequence, the most constraining bound is provided by nucleosynthesis,
as is evident from Fig. 5.3. The string branch of the spectrum can be extended (at least
in principle) to arbitrarily low frequencies, provided that the slope is not too flat, to avoid


                                             103
                                                                        NUCLEOSYNTHESIS
                                    -5
                                                       PULSAR




                         G h 100)
                                          COBE
                                    -10                                          3-2




                         2
                                                 de Sitter
                                    -15




                         Log 10 (
                                    -20




                                          -18    -13     -8        -3        2   7     12
                                                             Log 10 (   /Hz)




Figure 5.3: Expected graviton spectra in minimal pre-big bang models, compared with the
flat (or decreasing) spectra of the standard inflationary scenario.


a conflict with the pulsar bound. It should be stressed, however, that the nucleosynthesis
bound applies to the total integrated energy density, and thus becomes more and more
stringent as the spectrum is flatter and the string phase is longer.
    Given our present ignorance of the dynamical details of the string phase, where high-
curvature and quantum-loop effects are expected to play a significant role, the precise shape
of the spectrum turns out to be (at present) strongly model-dependent (as also stressed by
the examples analysed in [148]). It is remarkable that, in spite of this uncertainty, it may be
possible to provide an accurate (and rather model-independent) estimate of the theoretically
allowed region for the expected spectrum, in the plane of Fig. 5.3.


5.3   Allowed region in the ω – Ω plane

The determination of the allowed region requires a precise estimate of the coordinates of
the end-point of the spectrum [117], ω1 and Ω(ω1 ). The first one is the maximal amplified
frequency, corresponding approximately to the production of one graviton per polarization
mode and per unit of phase-space volume. The present value of this frequency is:
                                                                  H1 a1
                                                 ω1 (t0 ) =              .                  (5.17)
                                                                  a(t0 )

The second one is the associated peak value,

                                                                    ω14
                                                  Ω(ω1 ) =                                  (5.18)
                                                                   π 2 ρc

(from Eq. (4.92)). The present value of ω1 contains two elements of intrinsic uncertainty.



                                                             104
    A first uncertainty corresponds to the identification H1 = Ms . It is true that the final
transition scale should be controlled by the string mass scale, but the exact value of H1
might be slightly different from Ms . This uncertainty is expected to be small, however, and
can be neglected in a first approximation.
     A second (and just moreimportant) uncertainty is associated to the rescaling of ω1
from the transition time t1 down to t0 . There are in fact two possibilities. If the CMB
radiation that we observe today was all produced by the transition at t = t1 , together with
the gravitons, then the ratio ΩG /Ωγ remains fixed throughout the subsequent cosmological
evolution from t1 down to t0 , the redshift of ω1 is known and can be computed exactly.
If, on the contrary, there was some process of radiation production due to some reheating
phase occurring at time scales much later than t1 , then the present value of the ratio ΩG /Ωγ
can be arbitrarily diluted with respect to its original value at t1 , corresponding to a redshift
of ω1 which is in principle unknown and arbitrarily large.
    To take this last possibility into account, we may introduce the phenomenological param-
eter δs, representing the fraction of the present CMB entropy density due to all reheating
processes following the end of the string phase at t = t1 . This parameter is defined by
                                                    s0 − s1
                                             δs =           ,                               (5.19)
                                                       s0
where s0 and s1 are the thermal entropy density of the CMB background at t0 and t1 ,
defined in terms of the temperatures (T0 , T1 ) and of the numbers (n0 , n1 ) of particle species
contributing (with their own statistical weight) to the entropy:
                            2π 2                                      2π 2
                     s0 =        n0 (a0 T0 )3 ,               s1 =         n1 (a1 T1 )3 .   (5.20)
                             45                                        45
By using n1 /n0 ∼ 103 , and assuming thermal equilibrium at t = t1 , we then obtain [117]:
                                                 1/2
                                             Ms
                         ω1 (t0 ) ≃ T0                   (1 − δs)1/3 ,
                                             MP
                                                                     2
                                                                 Ms
                         ΩG (ω1 , t0 ) ≃ 7 × 10−5 h−2
                                                   100                     (1 − δs)4/3 ,    (5.21)
                                                                 MP
where T0 = 2.7 K ≃ 3.6 × 1011 Hz is the present CMB temperature.
    At fixed δs, the main uncertainty on the end-point values is thus controlled by the
fundamental ratio Ms /MP , as illustrated in Fig. 5.4, where the boxes around the end
point display an uncertainty corresponding to the allowed range 0.01 < (Ms /MP ) < 0.1.
By varying δs, the end point moves along the thin line with slope ω 4 . The present peak
intensity is thus depressed for large values of δs; however, as we can see from the picture,
even if 99% of the present entropy had been produced during the latest stage of evolution,
the intensity of the relic graviton background would stay well above the full line labelled
“de Sitter”, which represents the most optimistic prediction of the standard inflationary
scenario in this frequency range.

                                                    105
    We note, finally, that the same numerical value of the ratio Ms /MP also controls the
amplitude of the bulk graviton spectrum possibly produced in the context of a pre-big bang
scenario with large extra-dimensions [35, 31]. Indeed, even if the D-dimensional Planck
scale is smaller (for larger volumes of the internal space), the string scale is correspondingly
lowered, so as to keep the grand-unified gauge coupling in the above allowed range.
    The above discussion refers to the minimal models illustrated in the previous subsection,
where the end point and the peak of the spectrum are strongly correlated, according to Eq.
(5.21). Actually, what is really fixed in the pre-big bang scenario is the maximal height of
the peak, but not necessarily the position in frequency, and it is not impossible, in more
complicated, non-minimal models, to shift the peak to lower frequencies.
    In the minimal models, in fact, the end of the string phase coincides with the freezing
of the coupling parameter g = eφ/2 , and with the beginning of the standard radiation era.
In non-minimal models [278] (see also [45]) the coupling is still very small at the end of the
string phase, g(t1 ) ≪ 1, the dilaton keeps growing in a decelerated way while the curvature
starts decreasing, and the produced radiation becomes dominant only much later (such
models are also important in the context of reheating, see [132]).
    The main difference between the two classes of models is that in the non-minimal case the
effective potential V (η) appearing in the canonical perturbation equation is non-monotonic,
so that the highest frequency modes re-enter the horizon during the intermediate dilaton-
driven phase that follows the string phase and preceds the beginning of the radiation era.
This modifies the slope of the spectrum in the high-frequency sector, with the possible
appearance of a negative power [278] (see also [262]). The gravity-wave spectrum may
thus become non-monotonic, and the peak may no longer coincide with the end point, as
illustrated in Fig. 5.4. A similar behaviour for the spectrum is also obtained in the context
of non-minimal pre-big bang models that include a phase of “thermal inflation”, or a period
of early matter domination [480]. A phase of matter-dominated pre-big bang evolution
can also produce a flat graviton spectrum [251], but in that case the intensity of the relic
background is much smaller than the peak values reported in Fig. 5.4.
    These are good news from an experimental point of view, because they suggest the pos-
sibility of a large detectable signal, even at frequencies much lower than the gigahertz band.
However, they also provide a warning against too naive an interpretation and extrapola-
tion of possible future experimental data, because of the complexity of the parameter space
of the string cosmology models. It should be noted, for this purpose, that the spectrum
associated to the string phase could be monotonic only on the average, and could locally
oscillate even in minimal models [133], as illustrated by the wavy line appearing in the
high-frequency branch of the spectrum of Fig. 5.4.
    Given the present theoretical uncertainties, it seems appropriate to define the maximal
allowed region for the expected graviton background, i.e. the region spanned by the spec-
trum in the {ω, Ω} plane when all its parameters are varied. Such a region is illustrated


                                              106
                                     -5
                                              non-minimal models           minimal models




                         G h 100)
                                    -7.5                                                         S=0




                         2
                                    -10                                S = 99%




                         Log 10 (
                                    -12.5                                                    4

                                                    de Sitter
                                     -15

                                          0         2.5         5          7.5          10       12.5

                                                                Log 10 (         /Hz)




Figure 5.4: Peak and end point of the graviton spectrum in minimal and non-minimal
models, as a function of δs. The boxes at the end of each strip represent the uncertainty
due to the unknown value of the ratio Ms /MP .

in Fig. 5.5, for the (phenomenologically interesting) high-frequency range ω > 1 Hz. The
figure emphasizes the possible, large enhancement (of about eight orders of magnitude) of
the expected graviton background in pre-big bang models, with respect to the standard
inflationary scenario. The maximal allowed intensity of the graviton background coincides
with the upper border of the strip with δs = 0 in Fig. 5.4, i.e. from Eq. (5.21):

                                                    Ωmax
                                                     G   ≃ 10−6 h−2
                                                                 100 .                                  (5.22)

Note that this upper limit is automatically compatible with the nucleosynthesis bound, Eq.
(5.4), even if the spectrum is nearly flat from the end point down to the hertz scale.
   This maximal amplitude can be conveniently expressed in terms of a useful experimental
parameter, the strain density Sh , defined by [255]
                                                       1
                                      hh(ν)h∗ (ν ′ )i = δ(ν − ν ′ )Sh (ν),                              (5.23)
                                                       2
and related to the energy density (5.7) (using the stochastic condition (4.67)) by [278, 463]:
                                                  3H02
                           Sh (ν) =                       ΩG (ν),                       ν = ω/2π.       (5.24)
                                                 4π 2 ν 3
The minimal experimental sensitivity required for a direct detection (by a single gravita-
tional antenna) of the maximal background (5.22) of pre-big bang gravitons is thus given
by [117]
                              1/2                 
                                                  kHz 3/2
                         Shmin      ≃ 3 × 10−26           Hz−1/2 .                  (5.25)
                                                   ν
   This shows that the minimal sensitivity needed to reach the border of the allowed region
grows with the frequency band to which the detector is tuned, even if such a border is the

                                                                107
                                     -5
                                                PRE-BIG BANG MODELS
                                                                     s




                         G h 100)
                                                                  ane
                                    -7.5  topological defects br




                         2
                                        axion seeds




                                                                                          dy
                                                                 nce
                                                              sse




                                                                                      k bo
                                                            te




                         Log 10 (
                                    -10
                                            phase        uin
                                          transitions q




                                                                                  blac
                                                              parametric
                                    -12.5
                                                              resonance

                                     -15      STANDARD INFLATION
                                          0      2.5      5          7.5          10           12.5

                                                          Log 10 (         /Hz)




Figure 5.5: Allowed region for the vacuum-fluctuation spectrum in string cosmology and
in the standard inflationary scenario, compared with other possible tensor perturbation
spectra of primordial origin.


same at all frequency scales (see Eq. (5.22) and Fig. 5.5). This effect may favour –from an
experimental point of view– detectors working at lower frequencies. Unfortunately –from a
theoretical point of view– the probability of a large background intensity seems to be larger
at higher frequencies, since the typical spectrum of pre-big bang models is growing. It is
important to stress, however, that the minimal required sensitivity (5.25) may be somewhat
relaxed, for realistic detection strategies in which the search for a stochastic background
proceeds through the cross-correlation of the outputs of two independent detectors (see the
next subsection).
     The relic background associated with the parametric amplification of the vacuum fluc-
tuations is compared, in Fig. 5.5, with other possible backgrounds of primordial origin,
obtained with different mechanisms: graviton radiation from cosmic strings [137, 68] and
other topological defects [473], from axion seeds [608], from bubble collision at the end of a
first-order phase transition [590], and from parametric resonance of the inflaton oscillations
[411, 66]. The spectrum obtained from a phase transition, plotted in the figure, refers to a
typical reheating temperature Tr ∼ 108 – 109 GeV, but higher peak values are possible for
higher Tr [590].
    Also shown in the figure is the linearly growing spectrum obtained in recently proposed
models of “quintessential” inflation [510, 334] and of “brane-world” inflation [550], and
a thermal black-body spectrum corresponding to a present temperature T0 ∼ 1 K. In
the standard inflationary scenario, a thermal background might originate at the Planck
scale, when the temperature is high enough to maintain gravitons in thermal equilibrium.
Such a background, however, should be strongly diluted (with respect to the present CMB
radiation) by the action of the subsequent inflationary phase, occurring at curvature scales


                                                          108
lower than Planckian. As a consequence, the surviving spectrum should correspond today
to an effective temperature so depressed as to be practically invisible. In the context of the
pre-big bang models, on the contrary, a thermal spectrum like that of Fig. 5.5 could be
simulated by the sudden transition of the low-energy dilaton-driven phase to the standard
radiation-dominated era – corresponding, for instance, to a minimal model of Section 5.2
with ηs ∼ η1 .
    It may be noted that all the primordial backgrounds of Fig. 5.5 are higher (in intensity)
than the background obtained from the amplification of the vacuum fluctuations in the
standard inflationary scenario, but not higher than the analogous background expected in
the context of the pre-big bang scenario. In any case, given the rich phenomenology of
possible spectra, it seems appropriate to report at this point the experimental sensitivities
of present gravitational antennas, referred in particular to the frequency range of Fig. 5.5.
This will be the subject of the next subsection.


5.4   Experimental sensitivities

The limiting sensitivity (5.25) (corresponding to the upper border of the allowed region in
Fig. 5.5) is unfortunately too high for the detectors that are at present in operation: the
cryogenic, resonant-mass, gravitational antennas (see [520] for a review). In fact, if we take
for instance the resonant bar NAUTILUS [173], the resonance frequencies are at 907 and
922 Hz and, at these frequencies, the strain sensitivity is approximately
                                  p
                                    Sh ≃ 5 × 10−22 Hz−1/2 .                             (5.26)

With some improvements, the sensitivity is expected to reach in a few years the target value
8 × 10−23 Hz−1/2 . Similar resonance frequencies (around 900 Hz) and similar sensitivities
are also typical of the other resonant detectors such as ALLEGRO [361], AURIGA [528],
and EXPLORER [506]. The resonant bar NIOBE [374], however, is working at a smaller
frequency (∼ 700 Hz) and could reach, in principle, a slightly better sensitivity.
    Interferometric detectors, such as LIGO [4], VIRGO [145], GEO600 [448] and TAMA300
[405], are already basically built and will soon become operative. The best planned sensi-
tivity, for the first-generation instruments, is around
                                    p
                                      Sh ≃ 10−22 Hz−1/2 ,                               (5.27)

very similar to the present bar sensitivities. This sensitivity, however, is available at a
smaller frequency band, ν = 100 Hz, and thus corresponds to a smaller limit in terms of the
energy density of the graviton background (see Eq. (5.24)). In practice, the interferometers
of first generation will be directly sensitive to ΩG h2100 ∼ 10−1 – 10−2 , better than resonant
bars, which can at most reach the critical density, but still well above the border of the
allowed region.


                                             109
    In order to approach the border sensitivity ΩG h2100 ∼ 10−6 , we must wait for the second
(and higher) generation of interferometers. The Advanced LIGO project [444], for instance,
might lead to a two orders of magnitude improvement of the sensitivity (5.27), at ν = 100
Hz, thus reaching the borderline (5.22). An even better result is expected for the space
                                                                              √
interferometer LISA [379], whose goal is to reach the strain sensitivity [362] Sh ≃ 4×10−21
Hz−1/2 in the frequency band from 3 to 10 mHz, corresponding (in this band) to the
remarkable limit ΩG h2100 ∼ 10−11 .
    Another interesting possibility concerns resonant detectors with spherical (or truncated
icosahedron) geometry, such as the TIGA [387, 481] or SFERA [39] projects. Hollow spheres
[172] are particularly promising: a large copper–aluminium detector (4 – 5 m in diameter),
                                                                         √
pushed to its extreme quantum limit may reach a strain sensitivity2 Sh ≃ 3 × 10−24
Hz−1/2 , with resonant frequencies of 600 and 2500 Hz (the resonance frequency can be
tuned, in principle, by varying the geometrical radius of the sphere). Such a limiting
sensitivity can be approached by the recently proposed wide-band “dual-sphere” detector
[156], which consists of a massive solid sphere suspended inside a larger hollow one. In
that case, a sapphire detector of an overall size of 2.6 m could reach a strain sensitivity
√
  Sh ≃ 10−23 Hz−1/2 , for frequencies between 1 and 4 kHz.
    Concerning higher frequencies (well above the kilohertz), the only possibility at present
seems to be the use of resonant electromagnetic cavities [512, 534] or waveguides [187]. There
are also recent experimental studies for detecting small displacements based on two coupled
microwave cavities [80]: such a detector reaches the maximum sensitivity when the frequency
of the incident gravitational wave is equal to the frequency-difference of the two cavity-
                                                                                 √
modes. In this way, it seems possible at present to reach the strain sensitivity Sh ≃ 10−20
Hz−1/2 for frequencies around the kilohertz range [160]. Unfortunately, however, this value
is well above the minimal required sensitivity (5.25).
    As shown explicitly by the above examples, the limiting sensitivity (5.25) seems not to
be within easy reach of present technology, for the case of a single detector. In addition, an
unambiguous detection of a stochastic gravity-wave background with a single experimental
apparatus would require a complete and exact knowledge of all the intrinsic instrumental
noises, and of all the backgrounds of different origins that could interact with the gravita-
tional antenna. Fortunately, an efficient answer to both difficulties is known: it is provided
by the cross-correlation of the outputs of two (or more) detectors [162, 255, 13, 17].
   Suppose that the outputs of two detectors, si (t), i = 1, 2, are correlated over an inte-
gration time T , to define a signal:
                                      Z T /2
                                S=             dt dt′ s1 (t)s2 (t′ )Q(t − t′ ).        (5.28)
                                       −T /2

Here Q(t) is a real “filter” function, determined so as to optimize the signal-to-noise ratio
  2
      M. Cerdonio and L. Conti, private communication.



                                                     110
(SNR), defined by an ensemble average as:
                                                                              −1/2
                            SNR = hSi/∆S ≡ hSi hS 2 i − hSi2                           .         (5.29)

The outputs si (t) = hi (t) + ni (t) contain the physical strain induced by the cosmic back-
ground, hi , and the intrinsic instrumental noise, ni . The two noises are supposed to be
uncorrelated (i.e. statistically independent), hn1 (t)n2 (t′ )i = 0, and much larger in magni-
tude than the physical strains, |ni | ≫ |hi |. Also, the cosmic background is assumed to be
isotropic, stationary and Gaussian, with hhi i = 0. It follows that [17]:
                                      Z T /2
                             hSi =                dt dt′ hh1 (t)h2 (t′ )iQ(t − t′ ).             (5.30)
                                          −T /2


    The physical strain is given by the projection of the metric fluctuation hab (xi , t) (com-
puted at the detector position x = xi ) over the detector response tensor Diab , which charac-
terizes the spatial orientation of the arms of the i-th detector. If n̂ is a unit vector specifying
a direction on the two-sphere, and eab (n̂) is the gravity-wave polarization along n̂, we can
expands the strain in momentum space as
                                      Z         Z
                           hi (t) =        dp       d2 n̂ hA (p, n̂)FiA (n̂)e2πip(n̂·~xi −t) ,

                           FiA (n̂) = eA       ab
                                       ab (n̂)Di ,                                               (5.31)

where d2 n̂ denotes the angular integral over the unit two-sphere, and the index A labels the
two polarization modes of the wave; FiA (n̂) is the so-called “pattern function”, depending
on the geometry of the detector. Note that in the above equation we have used the proper
momentum p~ = ~k/a, even if the cosmological variation induced by the expansion of the
scale factor is negligible over a typical experimental time scale T . Note also that, for a
better comparison with experimental variables, we have used units in which h = 1, so that,
for a gravity wave, p = ν = ω/2π (but not in general for massive waves, see Section 6.4).
   For an isotropic, unpolarized and stationary background we can then use the stochastic
condition to define [17, 463]
                                                          1                             1
                     hh∗A (p, n̂), hA′ (p′ , n̂′ )i =       δAA′ δ(p − p′ )δ2 (n̂, n̂′ ) Sh      (5.32)
                                                         4π                             2
(the integration over the angular variables d2 n̂, d2 n̂′ then reproduces Eq. (5.23)). By insert-
ing the momentum expansion into Eq. (5.30), and assuming, as usual, that the observation
time T is much larger than the typical time intervals t – t′ for which Q 6= 0, we finally
obtain, using Eqs. (5.23) and (5.24):
                                                         Z
                                                  3H02       dp
                                hSi = N T                       γ(p)Q(p)Ω(p),                    (5.33)
                                                  8π 2       p3



                                                         111
where Q(p) is the filter function in momentum space, and γ(p) is the so-called “overlap-
reduction function”:
                                          Z
                                  1           d2 n̂
                           γ(p) =                   F1 (n̂)F2 (n̂)e2πipn̂·(~x2 −~x1 ) .                 (5.34)
                                  N           4π
Here N is an overall normalization factor, depending on the type of the detectors (for two
interferometers, a convenient choice is N = 2/5, see [17]; see [463] for the normalization of
different antennas).
   We now need to compute the variance ∆S 2 , which, for uncorrelated noises much larger
than the physical strains, can be expressed as [17]:
                      Z T /2
    ∆S 2 ≃ hS 2 i =            dtdt′ dτ dτ ′ hn1 (t)n1 (τ )ihn2 (t′ )n2 (τ ′ )iQ(t − t′ )Q(τ − τ ′ ).   (5.35)
                       −T /2

Introducing the (one-sided) noise power spectrum in momentum space, Pi (p), defined by
                                                     Z
                                                 1
                               hni (t)ni (τ )i =         dpPi (p)e−2πip(t−τ ) ,                         (5.36)
                                                 2
and assuming as before that T is much larger than the typical correlation intervals t – t′ , τ
– τ ′ , we obtain                      Z
                                     T
                             ∆S 2 =      dpP1 (p)P2 (p)Q2 (p).                        (5.37)
                                     4
The optimal filtering is now determined by the choice (see [17] for details)

                                                   γ(p)Ω(p)
                                         Q(p) = λ 3             ,                                       (5.38)
                                                 p P1 (p)P2 (p)
where λ is an arbitrary normalization constant. With such a choice one finally arrives, from
Eq. (5.33) and (5.38), to the optimized signal-to-noise ratio:
                                                      " Z                          #1/2
                              hSi    3H 2                      dp γ 2 (p)Ω2 (p)
                        SNR =     = N 20 T                                                .             (5.39)
                              ∆S     4π                        p6 P1 (p)P2 (p)

The background can then be detected, with a detection rate γ, and a false-alarm rate α, if
[17]:                            √                       
                         SNR ≥ 2 erfc−1 2α − erfc−1 2γ .                           (5.40)

    Armed with the above results, it is now possible to estimate the minimum detectable
background at a given confidence level, for any pair of gravitational antennas of given noise
power spectrum Pi and overlap γ. The correlation of all existing pairs of interferometers has
been studied in [44] and [17]. With the sensitivities of the first-generation interferometers,
for an observation time T = 4 months, a detection rate of 0.95, a false-alarme rate of 0.05,
and a flat graviton spectrum ΩG = const, the minimum detectable value is

                                           ΩG h2100 ≃ 5 × 10−6 .                                        (5.41)

                                                      112
This value can be improved only slightly by increasing the number of correlated detectors.
With the planned sensitivity of Advanced LIGO, however, one obtains the much better
limit [13, 17]:
                                  ΩG h2100 ≃ 5 × 10−11 .                            (5.42)

    The correlation between two resonant bars, and between a bar and an interferometer, has
been studied in [40, 41, 614, 44]. The minimum detectable values for the VIRGO-AURIGA
or VIRGO-NAUTILUS or AURIGA-NAUTILUS pairs is at present [463] ΩG h2100 ∼ a few
×10−4 (depending on the bar orientation) for a flat spectrum, one year of observation,
at the 90% confidence level. The correlation of two spherical detectors seems to be more
promising, however. Two spheres (of 3 m diameter) located at the same site could reach
a sensitivity [614] ΩG h2100 ∼ 4 × 10−7 . Also, studies reported in [172] suggest that the
correlation of hollow spheres could reach ΩG h2100 ∼ 10−9 .
    All the above results refer to a flat graviton spectrum. The signal-to-noise ratio, and
therefore the sensitivity, depend, however, on ΩG (p), and then on the slope of the spectrum
(see Eq. (5.39)), as also stressed in [463, 46]. The sensitivity to a growing spectral distri-
bution such as that predicted by pre-big bang models has been computed in particular in
[14, 593] and [45, 47], for a pair of LIGO and a (virtual) pair of VIRGO interferometers,
respectively. The minimum detectable intensity of the background, in that case, does not
show any improvement with respect to a flat spectrum; on the contrary, the sensitivity
could even suffer from a slight decrease, if the maximum of the signal is near the border of
the accessible frequency band, where the noise of the interferometer is higher.
    Finally, the cross-correlation in the case of space interferometers such as LISA has re-
cently been discussed in detail [594] by taking into account that, at lower frequencies, the
sensitivity to a stochastic graviton background of primordial inflationary origin is funda-
mentally limited by the possible presence of other astrophysical backgrounds, generated at
much later times, due for instance to binary systems of compact objects that cannot be
resolved as individual sources. A detailed analysis, performed for the cross-correlation of
two identical LISAs, leads to a minimum detectable signal ΩG h2100 ∼ 10−12 , in the mHz
range, for a flat spectrum. The three arms of LISA could also be combined in such a way
as to simulate two inteferometers located in the same place; unfortunately, they would be
rotated by an angle of π/4 with respect to one another, and the corrresponding overlap
function would be identically zero over the whole frequency range. This is the reason why
two space interferometers are needed, even in that case.
    To conclude this subsection, let us recall the best (direct) experimental upper bound
existing at present on the energy density of a stochastic graviton background, which has been
obtained from the cross-correlation of the two resonant bars NAUTILUS and EXPLORER
[37, 38]:
                           ΩG h2100 ∼
                                    < 60,                ν ≃ 907 Hz.                   (5.43)
This results corresponds to a very small observation time (T ∼ 12 hours), and it is thus far

                                             113
from the theoretical upper limit (5.25), but the future perspectives seem to be promising,
as reported in the above discussion. The cross-correlations of advanced (ground-based)
interferometers, space interforemeters, spheres, hollow spheres, are all expected to cross the
borderline sensitivity (5.25), and then to explore, in a very near future, the allowed region of
the string cosmology spectrum. Thus, future data from gravitational antennas will directly
constrain the parameter space of the minimal and non-minimal classes of pre-big bang
models considered in this section.
    We should add, finally, that useful information and constraints on the relic graviton
background will also be obtained from future measurements of the CMB polarization
[559, 400, 432]. The presence of a gravitational-wave background should in fact induce
a characteristic “curl component” in the large scale CMB polarization [401], which might
be detectable by dedicated experiments (already at the sensitivity level of the Planck satel-
lite [521]) for the gravitational spectra predicted by the standard inflationary models. No
polarization signal is expected to be detectable, on the contrary, for the graviton spectra of
pre-big bang models, whose amplitude is extremely suppressed at the large scales accessible
to the polarization experiments (see, however, Ref. [251] for possible exceptions).


6    Relic dilatons

The effective action of string cosmology always contains at least two fundamental fields,
the metric and the dilaton. The amplification of the dilaton fluctuations leads to dilaton
production, just like the amplification of the transverse, traceless components of the metric
fluctuations leads to graviton production. The possible formation of a stochastic background
of relic dilatons [271, 321, 276], with statistical and squeezing properties similar to those of
the graviton background, is one of the most peculiar phenomenological aspects of pre-big
bang models.
    The main physical difference with the graviton background, discussed in the previous sec-
tion, concerns the possible contribution of the mass to the dilaton spectrum (see Subsection
6.1). The dilaton should indeed be massive, according to conventional models of supersym-
metry breaking [52]. Also, the dilaton must be massive if it is coupled non-universally to
macroscopic matter with gravitational strength [577, 237], in order to avoid unacceptable
violations of the equivalence principle. The value of the dilaton mass, however, is largely
unknown from a theoretical point of view. There are phenomenological constraints on the
mass, but they depend on the effective coupling of dilatons to macroscopic matter, which
we shall discuss in Subsection 6.2. The value of the coupling, in turn, is strongly model-
dependent [197, 198], and phenomenologically constrained, at present, only by tests of the
equivalence principle and of Newtonian gravity available on a macroscopic scale [253, 380].
   As a consequence, the present amplitude of the relic dilaton background, controlled by
the string and dilaton mass, is more uncertain than in the graviton case. This is disap-


                                              114
pointing, on the one hand, as it prevents the existence of an unambiguous link between the
spectral properties of the dilaton background and the parameters of pre-big bang models.
On the other hand, however, it leaves open two interesting phenomenological possibilities:
a relic background of non-relativistic dilatons could represent a significant fraction of the
present dark matter density [271] (see Subsection 6.3) and, if the mass is small enough, it
could be detectable by the cross-correlation of gravitational antennas [287] already at the
sensitivity level of enhanced interferometric detectors [317], as will be discussed in Subsec-
tion 6.4.


6.1   Dilaton production

In this subsection we will estimate the spectral distribution of the dilatons obtained from
the amplification of the vacuum fluctuations, in the context of pre-big bang models. There
are, of course, also other cosmological mechanisms of production, such as particle collisions
at high (Planckian) temperature, coherent oscillations around the minimum of the scalar
potential (and more exotic mechanisms, such as dilaton radiation from cosmic strings; see
for instance [200]). We will concentrate here on the parametric amplification because, even
if the temperature remains too low to allow thermal production, and oscillations are avoided
through a symmetry that ensures the coincidence of the minima of the potential at early
and late times [199], quantum fluctuations cannot be eliminated; also, they may be expected
to represent the dominant source [457] when the inflation scale is not smaller than about
1016 GeV, as in the context of the pre-big bang scenario.
    The production of dilatons through the amplification of the quantum fluctuations of
the scalar background is very similar to the amplification of tensor perturbations, discussed
in Section 5. Unlike the graviton case, however, the analysis of dilaton perturbations is
complicated by their coupling to the scalar component of metric perturbations, and to the
scalar perturbations of the matter sources. The matter sources may even be absent from the
pre-big bang phase, but they are certainly not absent when dilatons re-enter the horizon,
in the radiation- and matter-dominated epoch.
    In order to discuss this effect, we shall work in the E-frame, in the longitudinal gauge,
and we shall assume that the d-dimensional, homogeneous and isotropic, unperturbed back-
ground is driven by the dilaton and by a perfect-fluid model of matter sources. Our inde-
pendent variables are the scalar metric, dilaton and fluid perturbation, respectively ϕ, ψ,
χ, δρ, δp, δui , defined by:
                             h                            i
                    ds2 = a2 dη 2 (1 + 2ϕ) − (1 − 2ψ) dx2i ,            δφ = χ,
                                                                        p+ρ
                    δT00 = δρ,       δTij = −δpδij ,           δTi0 =       δui .        (6.1)
                                                                         a

   In the E-frame the fluid sources are non-trivially coupled to the dilaton, and the unper-


                                             115
turbed equations take the form (in units 16πG = 1):
                                                                                          
                                 ν                                        1
                         2Rµ         − δµν R = ∂µ φ∂ ν φ + δµν         V − (∇φ)2 + Tµ ν
                                                                          2
                                            ∂V
                         ∇µ ∇µ φ +             + cT = 0,                                                                (6.2)
                                            ∂φ
                                            p
where the numerical factor c = 2/(d − 1) arises from the conformal transformation of
the S-frame string cosmology equations (see for instance Eq. (2.113)). The perturbation
of these equations, for the i 6= j components, gives ϕ = ψ, while the combination of the
perturbed (0, 0), (i, i) and dilaton equation leads to the vector-like equation for the doublet
Zk , representing the Fourier components of the metric and of the dilaton fluctuations [321]:

                             a′               
                 Zk′′ + 2       AZk′ + k2 B + C Zk = 0,                         Zk† = (ψk , χk ).                       (6.3)
                             a

    Here A, B, C are 2 × 2, time-dependent mixing matrices, whose explicit form depends
on the unperturbed solutions, on the equation of state γ(t) = p/ρ, on the model of fluid
perturbations ǫ(t) = δp/δρ and, finally, on the possible presence of a dilaton potential V (φ).
In particular, for an unperturbed background in which the dilaton can be parametrized by
φ = β ln a, with β = const, the mixing matrices are given by
                 1                                               1−ǫ
                                                                                !
                 2 (2d − 3 + dǫ),                            − 4(d−1) β
    A=                                                                                 ,                                (6.4)
             −(d − 1)[ cd
                        2 (1 − dǫ) + β],
                                                    1           c
                                                    2 (d − 1) − 4 (1 − dǫ)β
                                           
                     ǫ,                 0
    B=                                          ,                                                                       (6.5)
             −c(1 − dǫ)(d − 1),         1
                       ′′
                                                                           ′ 2                                            
              2(d − 2) aa + (d − 2)[d − 4 + dǫ + 2(d−1)
                                                   1−ǫ
                                                        β2]                a
                                                                           a       ,                  ǫ+1    ′ 2
                                                                                                     2(d−1) V a
    C=                                    2
                                                        ′ 2                                                               ,
             cd(d − 2)(ǫ − γ)[d(d − 1) − β2 ]            a
                                                         a      + 2(d − 2)V ′ a2 ,             [V ′′ − 2c (1 − dǫ)V ′ ]a2
                                                                                                                        (6.6)

where the primes denote differentiation with respect to conformal time, except for the
potential, where V ′ = ∂V /∂φ. Once Z is known, the density and velocity contrast are fixed
in terms of ψ and χ by two additional equations δρ = δρ(ψ, χ), δu = δu(ψ, χ), following,
respectively, from the perturbation of the (0i) and (00) background equations:
                                                                         
                                     a′
                       ∂i 2(d − 1)      (d − 2)ψ + ψ ′ − χφ′ = (ρ + p)aδui ,                                            (6.7)
                                      a
                                        "          ′ 2              #
                         2      a′ ′               a         d − 2 ′2
                       ∇ ψ − d ψ − d(d − 2)              −          φ ψ=
                                a                   a      2(d − 1)
                                                          
                             1        ′ ′   ∂V 2       2
                       =             φχ +       a χ + a δρ .                                                            (6.8)
                          2(d − 1)          ∂φ

   An exact computation of the dilaton fluctuations thus requires an exact solution of the
coupled equations (6.3). Also, the correct normalization of the dilaton spectrum to the

                                                         116
quantum fluctuations of the vacuum requires in general the diagonalization of the system
metric + dilaton + fluid sources, to find the normal modes of oscillation satisfying canonical
commutation relations, as discussed in Subsection 4.3.
   This program can be easily performed if we limit ourselves to a dilaton-dominated
pre-big bang phase with negligible matter sources (Tµν = 0 = δTµν ), and we consider
the high-frequency part of the spectrum, i.e. those modes re-entering the horizon during
the radiation-dominated phase, characterized by adiabatic fluid perturbations (γ = ǫ =
1/d) and by the dilaton frozen (β = 0) at the minimum of the non-perturbative potential
(∂V /∂φ = 0). In that case the canonical variables are known, and one finds that the
perturbation equations are decoupled in the radiation era, where the canonical variable for
the dilaton fluctuation is simply (in d = 3) χ = aχ, and satifies the (covariant) Klein–
Gordon equation (from the system (6.3)):

                                  χ′′k + (k2 + m2 a2 )χk = 0.                            (6.9)

    For relativistic modes, of proper momentum p = k/a ≫ m, the solution describes
(in conformal time) free plane-wave oscillations, and we thus recover for the dilaton the
same spectrum as in the graviton case [321]. Working in the framewok of minimal pre-big
bang models (see Subsection 5.2) we find, in particular, that the dilaton modes amplified
during the low-energy phase are characterized by the distribution Ωχ (p) ∼ p3 ln2 p. In order
to include the possible corrections due to the modified kinematics of the high-curvature
string phase, we may thus parametrize the high-frequency, relativistic branch of the dilaton
spectrum as
                                    2  4  δ
                               2 H1      a1      p
                  Ωχ (p, t) = g1                      ,        m < p < p1 .            (6.10)
                                   H      a     p1
Here 0 ≤ δ ≤ 3 is the slope parameter corresponding to a growing, but unknown, spectral
index; g1 = H1 /MP and p1 = k1 /a ≃ H1 a1 /a are the parameters associated to the transition
scale H1 ≃ Ms of minimal pre-big bang models. It should be noted that, unlike the graviton
case, we no longer identify proper momentum p and proper frequency ω, as we are dealing,
in principle, with massive particles for which ω 2 = p2 + m2 .
    The above spectral distribution cannot be extrapolated down to momentum scales re-
entering the horizon after equilibrium, since in the matter era the perturbation equations
(6.3) are no longer decoupled, even if the dilaton background is frozen at the minimum
of the potential (they remain coupled not only in the longitudinal gauge, but also in the
uniform-curvature gauge, defined in Eq. (4.41)). In addition, for modes of low enough
momentum p ∼   < m, we must take into account the non-relativistic correction to the above
spectrum (indeed, even if the mass term is negligible at the inflation-radiation transition
scale, i.e. k < ma1 , the proper momentum is redshifted with respect to the mass in the
subsequent radiation era, and all modes tend to become non-relativistic).
   When including the mass term, the general solution of Eq. (6.9) in the radiation era
can be written in terms of the parabolic cylinder functions [5], and its matching to the

                                             117
(massless) pre-big bang solution provides the correct inclusion of the mass contributions
to the spectrum. The details of the computation are the same as in the case of massive
axions [224], and will be reported in Section 7. Here we simply note that if a mode becomes
non-relativistic well inside the horizon, i.e. when p(t) > H, then the number of produced
dilatons is fixed after re-entry, when the mode is still relativistic, and the effect of the
mass is a simple rescaling of the energy density: Ωχ → (m/p)Ωχ . If, on the contrary, a
mode becomes non-relativistic outside the horizon, when p(t) < H, then the final energy
distribution turns out to be determined by the background kinematics at the exit time, and
the effective number of non-relativistic dilatons has to be adjusted by continuity, in such a
way that Ωχ has the same spectral distribution as in the absence of mass. The two regimes
are separated by the limiting momentum scale pm of a mode that becomes non-relativistic
just at the time it re-enters the horizon [271, 321]:
                                                                     1/2
                                                                m
                                              pm = p1                        .                            (6.11)
                                                                H1

   Taking into account such mass corrections, we may thus add to the relativistic dilaton
spectrum (6.10) two lower-frequency, non-relativistic bands (see also [292]):
                                             2         3         δ−1
                                m        H1          a1          p
              Ωχ (p, t) = g12                                                ,             pm < p < m,    (6.12)
                                H1       H           a           p1
                                        1/2            2         3         δ
                                    m             H1             a1          p
              Ωχ (p, t) = g12                                                          ,       p < pm .   (6.13)
                                    H1            H              a           p1
Note that these spectral distributions evolve in time like a−3 , and thus keep constant during
the matter-dominated era, for t > teq . Note also that, for simplicity, the non-relativistic
corrections have been referred to a single relativistic branch, with δ = 3 for the low-energy
pre-big bang phase, and with δ ≤ 3 for the string phase. However, the mass corrections can
be extended without difficulty to a more general situation in which there are two (or more)
branches in the relativistic spectrum, as in minimal pre-big bang models characterized by
the two frequency bands p < ps and p > ps (separated by the string scale ps = Hs ). In
such a case, the non-relativistic corrections will affect only the lower, or also the higher,
frequency band of the spectrum, depending on whether m < ps or m > ps , respectively.
    If the dilaton mass is large enough, the present amplitude of a possible relic dilaton
background is thus controlled by the (unknown) value of its mass. The cosmological bounds
on the spectrum can thus be translated into phenomelogical bounds on the mass, depending
(but only weakly) on the spectral index δ. Such bounds are to be combined with other,
model-dependent bounds on the mass related to the strength of the effective dilaton coupling
to macroscopic matter, which will be discussed in the next subsection.




                                                           118
6.2   Effective coupling to macroscopic matter

The motion of macroscopic test bodies in an external, non-trivial, gravidilaton background
is in general non-geodesic, if the body posseses a non-negligible dilatonic charge. Suppose in
fact that the interaction of macroscopic matter with the external scalar-tensor background
is described by the effective action of Subsection 4.1:
                            Z             h            i
                                    √
                      S=        d4 x −ge−φ −R + ω (∇φ)2 + SM (g, φ)                        (6.14)

(in units 2λ2s = 1), where the Brans–Dicke parameter ω is equal to −1 for the lowest-order
action of string theory, and we have added the action SM for the matter fields describing a
test body non-trivially coupled to the metric and to the dilaton. The variation with respect
to gµν and φ provides respectively the field equations (with 16πG = 1):
                                                                      
                                                                  ω                1
         Gµν + ∇µ ∇ν φ − (ω + 1)∇µ φ∇ν φ − gµν ∇ φ +  2
                                                                    + 1 gµν (∇φ)2 = eφ Tµν ,
                                                                  2                2
         R + ω (∇φ)2 − 2ω∇2 φ + eφ σ = 0,                                                  (6.15)

containing two source terms: the “gravitational charge density” Tµν (the dynamical stress
tensor), and the dilatonic charge density σ:
                      √                δSM                √             δSM
                          −g Tµν = 2        ,                 −g σ =        .              (6.16)
                                       δgµν                              δφ

   The combination of the above equations, and the use of the contracted Bianchi identity
∇ν Gµν = 0, then implies the covariant conservation of the stress tensor, ∇ν T µν = 0, for
any ω, provided σ = 0. If the dilatonic charge is non-zero, however, the gravitational charge
density is not separately conserved; for ω = −1, in particular, we obtain from Eqs. (6.15):

                                       ∇ν Tµν + σ∇µ φ = 0.                                 (6.17)

    To obtain the equation of motion of the test body we now integrate this equation over
a space-like hypersurface, and perform a multipole expansion of the external metric and
dilaton field around the world line xµ (τ ) of the centre of mass of the body [507]. In the
point-particle approximation, the gravitational and dilatonic charge densities are defined
by
                                               pµ pν (3) ′          
                                 T µν (x′ ) = √      0
                                                       δ  x − x(τ ) ,
                                                −gp
                                              m2 (3) ′            
                                 σ(x′ ) = q √      0
                                                     δ   x − x(τ )                         (6.18)
                                              −gp
(where pµ = muµ = mdxµ /dτ ), and we obtain the general equation of motion [285]
                                 duµ
                                     + Γαν µ uα uν + q∇µ φ = 0,                            (6.19)
                                  dτ

                                                119
where q is the dilatonic charge per unit of gravitational mass (representing the relative
strength of scalar to tensor forces).
    It is now evident that a non-zero q induces deviations from pure geodesic motion, and
that the experimental tests on the gravitational forces provide limits on the allowed values
of the dilaton charge. Large values of q can only be allowed if the dilatonic interactions, on
a macroscopical scale, are suppressed by a sufficiently small range. We may also note, for
future reference, that the relative acceleration between two world lines satisfying Eq. (6.19),
with infinitesimal separation ηµ , is given by a generalized equation of “geodesic deviation”
[285]:
                          D2 ηµ
                                 + Rβαν µ uα uν η β + qη β ∇β ∇µ φ = 0.                  (6.20)
                           Dτ 2
We shall come back to this point in Subsection 6.4.
   A precise estimate of q, in a string theory context, should start from the effective action
describing the coupling of the dilaton to the fundamental quark and lepton fields building
up ordinary macroscopic matter. Including all possible loop corrections, such an action can
be written in the general form
        Z                                                                               
                 √                                           1
   S=      dd+1 x −g −ZR (φ)R − Zφ (φ) (∇φ)2 − V (φ) + Zki (φ) (∇ψi )2 + Zm    i
                                                                                  (φ)ψi2 ,
                                                             2
                                                                                        (6.21)
        i
where Z are the dilatonic “form factors”, to all orders in the loop expansion, and where
we have used, for simplicity, a scalar model of fundamental matter fields ψi . The effective
masses (mi ) and dilaton couplings (gi ) of the fields ψi can then be defined in terms of
the canonical rescaled variables ψbi , which diagonalize the kinetic term and have canonical
dimensions. In the low-energy limit we may expand the φ−ψ interaction Lagrangian around
the value φ0 of the dilaton, which extremizes the effective potential [577, 321]:
                                                1 2 b2 1
                                       i 2
                          L(φ, ψi ) ≡ Zm ψi =    m ψ + gi φψbi2 + ...                    (6.22)
                                                2 i i  2
Performing the computation in both the String and Einstein frames [285], we find that the
dilatonic charges per unit of gravitational mass, respectively qi and qei in the two frames,
are related by (in units 16πG = 1):
                                       "                !#
                                gi   ∂             i
                                                  Zm
                           qi ≃ 2 =    ln                          = qei − 1.            (6.23)
                               mi   ∂φ            Zki        φ=0

Unless qei is fine-tuned to 1 (corresponding to an exact Brans–Dicke theory for the field ψi ),
the dilatonic charge is non-vanishing in both frames and, in general, is non-universal, as the
form factors Zi (φ) are different for different fields.
   As originally stressed in [577], this suggests a large dilatonic charge (qi ∼ 40 – 50) for
the confinement-generated components of hadronic masses, and a smaller charge, but of
gravitational intensity (qi ∼ 1), for leptonic masses (see also [237, 30]). If this is the case,

                                                120
the total charge of a macroscopic body is large (in gravitational units), and composition-
dependent.
   Consider in fact a macroscopic body of mass M , composed of B baryons with mass and
charge mb , qb , and Z electrons with mass and charge me , qe . The total dilatonic charge per
                  P        P
unit mass, q = i mi qi / i mi , for Z ∼ B, me ≪ mb , qe ≪ qb is then
                                                             
                                        Bmb qb            B
                                     q≃        =                  qb ,                       (6.24)
                                         M                µ
where µ = M/mb is the mass of the body in units of baryonic masses. Since B/µ ∼ 1, the
total dilaton charge of a macroscopic body is controlled by the dilaton coupling to baryons,
q ∼ qb ≫ 1, it is of the same order of magnitude in the String and Einstein frames, q ∼ qe,
and it is composition-dependent (as B/µ depends on the internal nuclear structure), with
variations, across different types of ordinary matter, which are typically of order [285]
                                                  
                                     ∆q    B
                                        ≃∆             ∼ 10−3 .                              (6.25)
                                      q    µ

    The only way to escape the conclusion that the dilaton charge of macroscopic bodies
is composition-dependent and large is to assume that the coupling of the dilaton to the
fundamental matter fields is universal (the same for all fields, to all orders in the loop
expansion), and to choose appropriate values of the parameters in the resulting scalar-tensor
effective action. This is not impossible, as illustrated by the model discussed in [197, 198].
In such a context, if the effective coupling is appropriately suppressed (q ≪ 1), the dilaton
mass can be very small, or even vanishing. The precise measurements of the gravitational
force over quite a wide range of distances provide in fact exclusion plots in the plane (q 2 , m2 ),
which constrain the dilaton charge as a function of its mass (see for instance [253] for a
comprehensive compilation of experimental bounds on possible “Yukawa” deviations from
Newtonian gravity, both for universal and composition-dependent interactions).
    For later use, let us recall here the phenomenological bound on the dilaton mass for a
large, composition-dependent dilaton charge [253]:
                                               −4
                                          m>
                                           ∼ 10 eV.                                          (6.26)

In the opposite, small-coupling regime, and in the mass range appropriate to gravitational
antennas, i.e. from 10−14 to 10−12 eV, corresponding to the frequency range from 10 to
1000 Hz, the phenomenological bounds [253] can be parametrized as

                    log q 2 ∼
                            < − 7,                                      <m∼
                                                                   1 Hz ∼  < 10 Hz,
                    log q 2 ∼
                            < − 7 + log(m/10 Hz),                        <m∼
                                                                   10 Hz ∼ < 1 kHz,          (6.27)

for universal dilaton interactions, and

                    log q 2 ∼
                            < − 8,                                      <m∼
                                                                   1 Hz ∼  < 10 Hz,
                    log q 2 ∼
                            < − 8 + log(m/10 Hz),                        <m∼
                                                                   10 Hz ∼ < 1 kHz,          (6.28)

                                                121
for composition-dependent interactions.
   We can now discuss the intensity of the relic-dilaton background, taking into account
two distinct phenomenological possibilities: 1) (heavy) massive dilatons, gravitationally (or
more strongly) coupled to macroscopic matter, and 2) massless (or very light) dilatons,
universally (and weakly enough) coupled to matter. In the last case, the conclusions about
a possible detection of the dilaton background produced by pre-big bang models are not
completely negative, as we shall illustrate in Subsection 6.4.


6.3     Bounds and allowed windows for heavy (strongly coupled) dilatons

Let us first discuss the large-coupling case q >   ∼ 1 (the most unfavourable, probably, for a
direct detection). In such a case m > ∼  10 −4 eV, so that today even the highest mode present

in the spectrum, p1 (t0 ), is non-relativistic (see Eq. (5.16)):
                                                  1/2                           !1/2
                              k1             H1            11                Ms
                  p1 (t0 ) =        ≃                     10    Hz ≃                     10−4 eV < m        (6.29)
                             a(t0 )          MP                              Mp

(since Ms < MP ). In other words, the branch (6.12) of the dilaton spectrum extends from
pm to p1 . We shall start assuming that the slope is steep enough, δ > 1, for the high-
frequency branch from pm to p1 to represent the dominant part of the spectrum. In that
case all the cosmological bounds that apply to the total integrated dilaton energy density
will become δ-independent [271, 321] (the case δ < 1 will be considered below).
    When the spectrum becomes non-relativistic, the dilaton energy density ρχ ∼ a−3 starts
to grow with respect to the radiation energy density, ργ ∼ a−4 . In particular, when the
Universe enters the matter-dominated era, the non-relativistic part of the dilaton spectrum
remains frozen (in critical units) at the value reached at the time of the matter-radiation
equilibrium, Ωχ (teq ). The present value of the dominant (non-relativistic) branch of the
spectrum can thus be expressed in terms of the equilibrium scale as:
                                             2               !1/2         δ−1
                                         H1           m2                p
      Ωχ (t0 , p) ≡ Ωχ (teq , p) ≃                                                  ,       pm < p < p1 ,   (6.30)
                                         MP          H1 Heq             p1

where we have used Eq. (6.12), and the fact that (H1 /Heq )2 (a1 /aeq )3 = (H1 /Heq )1/2 ,
assuming radiation-dominance from t1 to teq . We recall that, for the equilibrium curvature
scale, Heq ∼ 106 H0 ∼ 10−55 MP .
   A first important constraint [238, 240, 205] is now obtained by imposing that the energy
density stored in the coherent oscillations of non-relativistic dilatons, integrated over all
modes, remains smaller than critical, at all times:
                                             Z p1
                                                                       < 1.
                                                    d ln p Ωχ (t0 , p) ∼                                    (6.31)


                                                           122
For δ > 1 this gives the stringent constraint
                                                     !1/2
                                           Heq MP4
                                     <
                                    m∼                      ,                          (6.32)
                                            H13

which represents, in this context, the most restrictive upper bound on the mass of (not yet
decayed) dilatons. For 100 keV ∼   <m∼  < 100 MeV a more restrictive constraint on Ωχ is
provided in principle by the observations of the astrophysical background of diffuse γ-rays
[200]; such a range of masses, however, tends to be excluded, as will be shown below, in the
context of pre-big bang models where the inflation scale is controlled by the string mass,
H1 ≃ Ms .
   The critical density bound (6.32) can be evaded if the dilatons are heavy enough to
decay, so that the energy stored in their coherent oscillations was dissipated into radiation
before the present epoch. The decay scale Hd is fixed by the decay rate (for instance into
two photons) as
                                    Hd ≃ Γd ≃ m3 /MP2                                  (6.33)
(which implies, in particular, that the produced dilatons have not yet decayed, today, only
     < 100 MeV). The decay, however, generates radiation, reheats the Universe, and is
if m ∼
associated in general to a possible entropy increase

                                      ∆S ≃ (Tr /Td )3 ,                                (6.34)

where Tr and Td are the final reheating temperature and the radiation temperature imme-
diately before dilaton decay, respectively. The decay process is thus the source of additional
phenomenological constraints on the dilaton spectrum, which are complementary to the
critical bound (6.32), as they imply in general a lower bound on the dilaton mass.
    In order to discuss the consequences of dilaton decay let us note, first of all, that the
induced reheating is significant (Tr > Td , ∆s > 1) provided dilatons decay when they are
dominant with respect to radiation, i.e. for Hd < Hi , where Hi is the curvature scale
marking the beginning of dilaton dominance. Such a scale is defined by the condition
Ωχ (ti ) = Ωγ (ti ), where Ωχ (ti ) is obtained by integrating over all modes the dominant
branch (6.12) of the non-relativistic dilaton spectrum. For δ > 1 this leads to

                                     mH1 /MP2 ≃ a1 /ai ,                               (6.35)

from which
                                      Hi ≃ m2 H13 /MP4                                 (6.36)
(we have assumed that such a scale belongs to the radiation era, Hi > Heq ; otherwise, the
bound we obtain is less stringent).
   At the given scale Hi , the radiation temperature is fixed by the Einstein equations (and
by the Sefan law ρ ∼ T 4 ) as
                                      Ti = k(MP Hi )1/2 ,                             (6.37)

                                             123
where k is a dimensionless numerical factor of order unity, which disappears from the final
estimate. The radiation temperature at the epoch of dilaton decay, Td , is then obtained by
the adiabatic rescaling
                                                 2/3                           !1/6
                                 ai            Hd                        m10
                      Td =          Ti =                   Ti ≃ k                          ,   (6.38)
                                 ad            Hi                       MP H13

since the scale factor evolves like t2/3 during the phase dominated by the non-relativistic
dilatons. After the decay, on the other hand, the Universe becomes radiation-dominated,
with a reheating temperature fixed by the decay scale as
                                                                        !1/2
                                                    1/2         m3
                              Tr = k(MP Hd )              =k                   ,               (6.39)
                                                                MP

and with a final, total entropy increase [271, 321]:
                                                            !1/2
                                                     H13
                                          ∆S ≃                      .                          (6.40)
                                                    mMP2

This entropy injection can in principle disturb nucleosynthesis and/or baryogenesis [238,
240, 205], and we should consider two possibilities.
  If the reheating temperature Tr is too low to allow nucleosynthesis, Tr < 1 MeV, i.e.
  <
m ∼ 10 TeV, we must assume that nucleosynthesis occurred before, and we must impose

                                < 10,
                             ∆S ∼                               < 10 TeV,
                                                               m∼                              (6.41)

to avoid destroying the light nuclei already formed (more precise bounds can also be deter-
mined through a detailed analysis of photodissociation [239] and hadroproduction [217]).
    If the reheating temperature is large enough to allow nucleosynthesis, Tr > 1 MeV, i.e.
m> ∼ 10 TeV, the only possible constraint comes from primordial baryogenesis. The bound
is model-dependent, but the constraint

                             < 105 ,
                          ∆S ∼                                 m>
                                                                ∼ 10 TeV,                      (6.42)

seems to be sufficient [238, 240, 205] not to wash out any pre-existing baryon–antibaryon
asymmetry (this bound could be evaded in the case of low-energy baryogenesis occurring
at a scale H < Hd ).
    The above constraints can be easily extended to the case δ ≤ 1, see [271, 321]. Consider,
for instance, the critical density bound. For 0 ≤ δ ≤ 1 the non-relativistic spectrum (6.30)
has a peak at p = pm = p1 (m/H1 )1/2 , which dominates the integral (6.31), and which leads
to a total integrated energy density:
                                              2              !1/2           δ−1
                                          H1         m2                  m         2
                         Ωχ (t0 ) ≃                                                    .       (6.43)
                                          MP        Heq H1               H1

                                                    124
The bound Ωχ < 1 now imposes [271, 321]
                                             4         1      δ−4
                             < MPδ+1 Heq
                            m∼         δ+1
                                           H1δ+1 ,                     δ ≤ 1,                (6.44)

which for δ = 1 exactly reduces to the condition (6.32).
   For the dilaton decay the situation is similar: if δ ≤ 1 the total energy density is
dominated by the contribution of p = pm , and all bounds become δ-dependent. The scale
Hi of dilaton dominance, obtained by equating Ωχ (pm ) to Ωγ in the radiation era, becomes
Hi ≃ mδ+1 H14−δ MP−4 , and the corresponding increase of entropy is
                                   3                1/2                      1/2
                               Tr                Hi
                    ∆S =                 =                    ≃ mδ−2 MP−2 H14−δ          .   (6.45)
                               Td                Hd

    Taking into account all bounds, we obtain the allowed region in the plane (m, H1 )
illustrated in Fig. 6.1. The allowed values are below the upper (bold) solid lines for a
growing (δ ≥ 1) spectrum [271], and below the lower (thin) solid lines for a flat (δ = 0)
spectrum [342, 238, 240]. For 0 < δ < 1 the allowed region interpolates between the two
limiting cases illustrated in the figure.
    To the left, the region is bounded by the tests of the equivalence principle, Eq. (6.26),
as we are considering dilatons with large couplings to macroscopic matter, q >  ∼ 1. To the
right, the mass is bounded by the condition m < MP (not shown in the picture), which has
to be imposed to avoid overcritical density in case m > H1 , when the produced dilatons
are already non-relativistic from the beginning [321] (in that case there are no additional
bounds, as dilatons decay before becoming dominant). Finally, the upper limit on the
inflation scale, H1 < MP , is required to avoid overcritical production of massless particles
                                 R
since, for a growing spectrum, d ln pΩ(p) ∼ g12 = (H1 /MP )2 (see for instance Eq. (6.10)).
    In the standard inflationary scenario the spectrum tends to be flat, and the “natural”
value for the dilaton mass required by models of supersymmetry breaking [52], m ∼ 1 TeV,
is not consistent with the preferred value of the inflation scale, H1 ∼ 10−5 MP , typically
determined by the grand-unification phase transition (this is the so-called problem of the
dilaton mass). In string cosmology the spectrum tends to be growing, the allowed region
“inflates” in parameter space, and the TeV mass scale becomes marginally compatible with
the wanted inflation scale. Unfortunately, however, in a string cosmology context, H1 is
expected to be determined by the string scale, and thus fixed around (0.1 – 0.01)MP , so
that the problem remains.
    A possible solution of this problem can be obtained in the presence of a late, post-
inflationary reheating phase, preceding nucleosynthesis and dilaton decay, and producing a
suitable dilution of the original dilaton density by the factor [276]
                                                           4/3
                                             4/3       nf                     (sf − sb )
                   Ωχ → Ωχ (1 − δs)                                ,   δs =              .   (6.46)
                                                       nb                         sf

                                                            125
                                                                                                                                       H1 < Mp
                                            0.0
                                                                                         1 Tev
                                                                                                                                  .
                                                                                                                             og




                                                                               cri
                                                                                                                        ry




                                                        equiv. principle



                                                                                  tic
                                                                                                                   ba




                         Log10 (H1 / Mp)




                                                                                     al
                                           - 2.5




                                                                                        de
                                                                                          nsi
                                                                                             ty
                                                                                                             os.
                                                                                                       cle
                                           - 5.0                                                  nu


                                           - 7.5


                                           - 10

                                                   -5                      1              7                   13                      19         25
                                                                                              log10            Hz)
                                                                                          Log10 (m / eV)




Figure 6.1: Allowed region for a growing (below the bold lines) and flat (below the thin
lines) dilaton spectrum, for strongly coupled dilatons.

Here sb , sf , nb , nf are, respectively, the thermal entropy density of the CMB radiation and
the number of particles species in thermal equilibrium, at the beginning (tb ) and at the
end (tf ) of this reheating process. An efficient reheating, sf ≫ sb , δs → 1, reduces in a
significant way the dilaton fraction of critical density Ωχ : as a consequence, the scale (6.36)
of dilaton dominance is lowered, the decay temperature (6.38) is raised, and the bounds on
m following from the entropy constraint (∆S < 10) and the critical bound (Ωχ < 1) are
relaxed. Such a reheating is possible, for instance, in the context of models of “intermediate
scale” inflation [531], or “thermal” inflation [458].
    Even without such a relaxation, the minimal pre-big bang scenario leaves open two
interesting mass windows, obtained by intersecting the allowed region of Fig. 6.1, for δ ≥ 1,
with the allowed value of the string mass scale [403],
                                                             < Ms /MP ∼
                                                        0.01 ∼        < 0.1                                                                           (6.47)

(under the assumption H1 ≃ Ms ). It follows that there are two possible ranges for the
dilaton mass [276]:

                      10−4 eV ∼
                              <m∼
                                < 10 keV,                                                                                             m>
                                                                                                                                       ∼ 10 TeV       (6.48)

illustrated in Fig. 6.2. The vertical solid line at the 100 MeV mass scale, shown in Fig.
6.2, corresponds to a dilaton decay rate of the same order as the present Hubble scale,
Hd ≃ m3 /MP2 ≃ H0 . To the right of this line all produced dilatons have already decayed,
while to the left, and in particular inside the window of Eq. (6.48), dilatons are still around
us, and could in principle be observed.
   If, in addition, the mass is within the restricted range
                                                               <m∼
                                                        100 eV ∼ < 10 keV,                                                                            (6.49)

                                                                                       126
                                                                                                            .
                                                                                                          og




                                                                            cri
                                            0.0
                                                                                                       ary




                                                                               tic
                                                                                                      b




                                                                                  al
                                                                                                           string mass scale




                                                                                     de
                         Log10 (MS / Mp)




                                                                                       ns
                                           - 2.5




                                                                                         ity
                                                        equiv. principle
                                           - 5.0
                                                                                                     os.
                                                                                                  cle
                                                                                                nu       dilaton decay
                                                                                                           m = 100 MeV
                                           - 7.5


                                           - 10

                                                   -5                       1            7           13         19        25
                                                                                             log10   Hz)
                                                                                         Log10 (m / eV)




Figure 6.2: Allowed mass windows for heavy (strongly coupled) dilatons in minimal pre-big
bang models with δ ≥ 1. The region within the shaded triangle corresponds to a significant
dilaton contribution to the present cold dark matter density.


obtained by intersecting the string mass scale with the critical density bound (6.32), then
the produced dilatons could even saturate the critical density value, or at least could provide
a significant fraction of the present cold dark-matter density [271], with

                                                                           0.01 ∼    < 1,
                                                                                < Ωχ ∼                                         (6.50)

according to Eq. (6.30). It is important to recall, in such a context, that the possibility
of a small dilaton mass is not theoretically excluded (in spite of the “standard” TeV mass
range), as shown for instance by models of supersymmetry breaking with light dilatons
[250]. Also, it is important to stress that the range of masses saturating the critical density
bound moves to lower and lower values as the spectrum becomes flatter and flatter (see Eq.
(6.44) with H1 = Ms ). For δ → 0, in particular, the critical bound is saturated by

                                                             m = Heq (MP /Ms )4 ,                                              (6.51)

corresponding to masses as small as 10−19 eV (or lower).
    Such values of mass are excluded neither theoretically nor experimentally, as discussed
in Subsection 6.2, provided the dilaton coupling to macroscopic matter is sufficiently small,
q ≪ 1. It is then possible to imagine a cosmological scenario in which a relic background
of non-relativistic dilatons, produced as a consequence of the pre-big bang evolution, could
provide today a significant contribution to the critical energy density and, simultaneously,
have a mass in the appropriate range to stimulate a resonant response of present gravi-
tational antennas [287] (i.e. m ∼ 10−12 – 10−14 eV). In that case, the high intensity of
the background (not constrained by nucleosynthesis, as in the graviton case), could possi-
bly compensate the weakness of the dilatonic charge of the antennas, and could determine


                                                                                      127
in principle a detectable signal. This interesting possibility will be discussed in the next
subsection.


6.4   Detection of ultra-light dilatons

A stochastic background of relic dilatons, produced by a phase of pre-big bang evolution,
and light enough to have a lifetime larger than the present Hubble scale, could interact today
in two ways with the existing gravity wave detectors: either indirectly, through a geodesic
coupling of the detector to the scalar part of the induced metric fluctuations contained in
the Riemann tensor [83, 82, 111, 564, 464, 493], or even directly through the non-geodesic
coupling of the dilaton to the scalar charge of the detector [285, 287] (see Eqs. (6.19),
(6.20)).
   In the first case the coupling has a gravitational strength, but the amplitude of scalar
metric perturbations, at the typical resonant scales of present detectors, could be much
lower than the amplitude of the original dilaton fluctuations. In the second case the detector
could be coupled to a background of very high intensity (of order 1 in critical units), but
with a coupling constant strongly suppressed for phenomenological reasons, as discussed in
Subsection 6.2.
     In order to take into account both possibilities, we will estimate the scalar-to-noise
ratio associated to a stochastic dilaton background by assuming that the physical strains
hi (t) (i = 1, 2), induced on a pair of gravitational antennas, vary in time like the scalar
fluctuations φ(xi , t) that perturb the detectors, and are proportional to the scalar pattern
functions Fi (n̂) through the scalar charges qi of the detectors [287, 317]:
                       hi (t) = φ(xi , t)Fi (n̂),              Fi (n̂) = qi eab (n̂)Diab .          (6.52)
Here eab (n̂) is the polarization tensor of the scalar wave propagating along the n̂ direction,
and Diab is the detector response tensor (see Subsection 5.4); finally, qi = 1 for the coupling
to scalar metric fluctuations, while qi ≪ 1 for the direct coupling of long-range scalar fields.
    We expand the strain in momentum space, taking into account the mass of the scalar
fluctuations (~
              p = pn̂),
                               Z ∞        Z               h                                    i
                    hi (t) =         dp       d2 n̂ Fi (n̂) φ(p, n̂)e2πi[pn̂·~xi −E(p)t] + h.c. ,
                               0
                            e 2 + p2 )1/2 ,
                    E(p) = (m                              m
                                                           e = (m/2π),                              (6.53)
and we use the stochastic condition which, for a scalar spectrum Ω(p),
                                              Z
                                                                  MP2
                                   ρ = ρc         d ln p Ω(p) =       h|φ̇|2 i,                     (6.54)
                                                                  16π
can be written as
                                                      3H02 Ω(p)
                     hφ⋆ (p, n̂), φ(p′ , n̂′ )i =                  δ(p − p′ )δ2 (n̂ − n̂′ ).        (6.55)
                                                     8π 3 pE 2 (p)

                                                        128
By imposing optimal filtering [17], and following the same steps as in Subsection 5.4 for the
graviton case, we finally arrive at the signal-to-noise ratio [317]:
                      !"        Z ∞                                                        #1/2
               H02                           dp                 Ω2 (p) γ 2 (p)
     SNR =                 2T                               p               p                     ,   (6.56)
               5π 2              0    p3 (p2 + m̃2 )3/2 P1 ( p2 + m̃2 ) P2 ( p2 + m̃2 )

where T is the total integration time, P1 (|ν|), P2 (|ν|) are the one-sided noise spectral density
of the detectors, defined as Fourier transforms of the frequency ν = E(p) = (m       e 2 + p2 )1/2 ,
and γ(p) is the overlap reduction function, defined in momentum space by:
                                              Z
                                         15
                                γ(p) =            d2 n̂F1 (n̂)F2 (n̂)e2πipn̂·(~x2 −~x1 )              (6.57)
                                         4π
(normalized so that γ = 1 for coincident and coaligned interferometers). For m → 0 and
q → 1 we recover the signal-to-noise ratio (5.39), modulo a different normalization of γ.
   The result (6.56) determines the cross-correlation and the detectability of a signal in-
duced by a massive scalar spectrum Ω(p). We may distinguish three phenomenological
possibilities.
     If m is much larger than the typical sensitivity band ν0 of the antenna, then the noises
Pi , estimated at the frequency ν = (me 2 +p2 )1/2 ≫ ν0 , tend to infinity, and we cannot expect
to detect a signal. If, on the contrary, m ≪ ν0 (which includes the massless case, discussed
in [43]), then the detectors in their sensitivity band will respond to the relativistic branch
of the spectrum, whose integrated amplitude is constrained by the nucleosynthesis bound,
Ω ∼ < 10−6 (see Subsection 5.1). In addition, the response is possibly suppressed by the
factor q 2 ≪ 1, because the dilaton field has a long range. As a consequence, we may expect
in such a case a signal not larger (and possibly much smaller) than the signal produced by
a relic graviton background.
    The interesting possibility corresponds to the dilaton mass in the sensitivity band of the
detectors (m ∼ ν0 ), where the overlap is large and the noises as small as possible. In that
case we have a resonant response also to the non-relativistic branch (p < m) of the spectrum,
which is not constrained by nucleosynthesis and can approach the critical density bound, as
emphasized in the previous subsection. In order to discuss the possibility of detection let us
then consider the most favourable case, in which the non-relativistic branch dominates the
                                                   R
spectrum and saturates the critical density, h2100 m d ln pΩ ∼ 1 (more precisely, we should
impose the saturation of Ω at ≃ 0.35, to be consistent with present dark-matter estimates
[586]). Let us suppose, also, that the spectrum is peaked around p ∼ m, and that the
contribution of the relativistic branch p > m, if present, is negligible.
    The integral (6.56), in such a case, can be estimated by integrating over the non-
relativistic modes only, and approximating Pi with their constant values at ν = m. We
consider the ideal case of two identical detectors (P1 = P2 = P , q1 = q2 = q), with maximal
overlap (γ = 1) at ν = m and integration time T = 108 s. The dilaton background is then


                                                         129
detectable, SNR > 1, provided [287]:

                               m5/2 P (m) ∼
                                          < q 2 × 10−32 Hz3/2 .                          (6.58)

    The intersection of this condition with the noise power spectrum P (ν) of present grav-
itational antennas provides a rough estimate of the allowed values of the dilaton mass,
possibly compatible with a direct detection of a stochastic dilaton background. The mass
windows depend, of course, on the values of the dilaton coupling. By using a simple, power-
law parametrization [188] of the VIRGO noise curve, for instance, we find [287] that the
detectable mass windows extends, for q 2 = 1, over the full sensitivity band of the detector
(1 Hz to 10 kHz). However, the window decreases as q decreases, and closes completely for
   < 10−8 .
q2 ∼
    As already stressed at the beginning of this section (and in Subsection 6.2), a large value
of q 2 can only refer, in this context, to the indirect coupling of the gravitational antennas
to the (scalar) metric perturbation spectrum generated by the dilatons. It seems unlikely,
however, that such a spectrum, even including the non-relativistic corrections due to the
dilaton mass, can be high enough (at the kHz scale) to saturate the critical density bound,
as assumed to obtain the condition (6.58).
    For the direct coupling to the dilaton background, on the other hand, we have to re-
call that the maximum allowed value of q 2 , for composition-dependent and -independent
interactions, are summarized in Eqs. (6.27), (6.28)). Taking into account such bounds, we
are led to the situation illustrated in Fig. 6.3, where the noise power spectrum of VIRGO
[188] (bold curve) is compared with the condition (6.58) at fixed q (thin dashed lines) and
with the maximal allowed values of q 2 , for universal (bold upper lines) and composition-
dependent (thin lower lines) scalar interactions. A scalar background of nearly critical
density, non-universally coupled to macroscopic matter, turns out to be only marginally
compatible with detection (at least, at the level of sensitivity plotted in the picture). If the
coupling is instead universal (for instance, as in the dilaton model discussed in [197]) but
the scalar is not exactly massless, then there is a mass window open to detection:

                                 10−14 eV ∼ < 10−12 eV.
                                          <m∼                                            (6.59)

   The above results, to be interpreted only as a first qualitative indication, are confirmed
by a more realistic analysis of the cross correlation of the two LIGO interferometers [317],
performed by applying Eq. (6.56) to the phenomenological power spectrum:

                               e δ,
                Ω(p) = δ Ω0 (p/m)                    < m,
                                                    p∼ e            0 < δ ≤ 3.           (6.60)

In spite of the reduced value of the overlap factor we find (for any δ, but with Ωs ∼ 1) a
significant SNR in the relevant mass range, already at the level of the Enhanced LIGO con-
figuration. No possibility of detection, even with the Advanced LIGO configuration, is found
instead for a non-relativistic spectrum peaked outside the detector sensitivity band, such

                                              130
                               -40
                               -41
                               -42
                               -43
                      Log S Hz
                               -44
                               -45
                               -46
                                        0           1        2     3           4
                                                        Log m Hz-1




Figure 6.3: The noise spectrum of VIRGO (bold curve) is compared with the maximal values
of q 2 allowed by gravitational phenomenology, in two cases: universal (bold upper lines)
and composition-dependent (thin lower lines) scalar interactions. The thin dashed lines
correspond, from left to right, to q 2 = 10−8 , 10−7 , 10−6 , 10−5 , 10−4 . The region compatible
with a detectable signal is above the noise spectrum and below the upper bounds on q 2 .


as the “minimal” spectral distribution (6.12), (6.13). It should be stressed, however, that
interferometric detectors are particularly unfavoured for the detection of a non-relativistic
scalar background, because their response tensor Dab is traceless: spherical resonant detec-
tors represent more promising devices, and it seems appropriate to conclude this section by
reporting the possible enhanced level of SNR when a massive scalar background interacts
with the monopole mode of a resonant sphere [174].
    For a massive scalar wave there are in fact two possible pattern functions, one associated
to the geodesic coupling of the detector to the scalar component of metric fluctuations [464]
(the Riemann term in Eq. (6.20)), the other related to the direct, non-geodesic coupling
of the charge qi of the detector to the spatial gradients of the scalar background [285]. In
terms of the transverse and longitudinal decomposition of the polarization tensor of the
wave, with respect to the propagation direction n̂,

                          Tab = (δab − n̂a n̂b ),            Lab = n̂a n̂b ,              (6.61)

the two pattern functions can be written, respectively, as [317]
                                               !
                              ab        e2
                                        m                                  p2 ab
                 F (n̂) = D        Tab + 2 Lab ,             Fq (n̂) = q      D Lab .     (6.62)
                                        E                                  E2

    For the differential mode of an interferometer [255] D ab δab = 0, so that, in both cases,
the pattern function of massive waves turns out to be proportional to the massless pattern
function and, for non-relativistic modes, it is highly suppressed by the factor (p/E)2 [317].
The monopole mode of a resonant sphere, on the contrary, is characterized by the response

                                                131
tensor D ab = δab [82]. The non-geodesic pattern function Fq (n̂) is still suppressed, but the
geodesic part is not, and the overlap function (6.57) takes the simple form
                                                          !2
                                   15       e 2 + 2p2
                                           3m                   sin(2πpd)
                            γ(p) =                                        ,              (6.63)
                                   2π       e 2 + p2
                                            m                       pd

where d is the spatial separation of the detectors. The response to scalar spectra peaked
at p ≪ m is thus strongly enhaced with respect to interferometric detectors (at least in the
case of geodesic coupling).
    Beside this effect there is a second possible enhancement, for flat enough spectra, asso-
ciated to a faster growth of SNR with the observation time T . Consider, for instance, the
cross-correlation of two spherical detectors according to Eq. (6.56), computed for the spec-
trum (6.60) with the overlap (6.63). Assuming that the instrumental noises are constant
(and finite) for p ranging from 0 to m,e it follows that for δ < 1 the momentum integral is
dominated by its lower limit, i.e. by the infrared cut-off scale pmin determined, for p → 0, by
the “minimum” observable frequency interval ∆ν associated to the “maximal” observation
time T [174]:

                ∆ν = (p2 + m
                           e 2 )1/2 − m
                                      e > T −1 ,                   pmin = (2m/T
                                                                            e   )1/2 .   (6.64)

    This effect modifies, for δ < 1, the final T -dependence of SNR, and enhances the response
of the detector with the growth of the observation time. Performing the integral for δ < 1
one finds in fact (modulo numerical factors)
                                              2
                              Ωs          H0
                   SNR ≃                             e )1−δ/2 ,
                                                    (mT                       δ < 1,     (6.65)
                            m
                            e P (m)
                                 e        m
                                          e

to be compared with the more standard result
                                              2
                              Ωs          H0
                   SNR ≃                             e )1/2 ,
                                                    (mT                       δ ≥ 1.     (6.66)
                            m
                            e P (m)
                                 e        m
                                          e

For T = 107 s, and a mass in the kilohertz range, the sensitivity of spheres to a flat enough
and massive spectra is thus increased by a factor 1010(1−δ)/2 with respect to interferometric
detectors (see [174] for a more detailed discussion).
    We may thus conclude, summarizing the results of this subsection, that both interfero-
metric and resonant gravitational antennas seem to be able to explore the possible presence
of a light (but non-relativistic) dilatonic component of dark matter, and thus to constrain
the parameters of the pre-big bang models, in a mass range that overlaps with their sen-
sitivity band. This is possible in spite of the fact that the relic dilaton background could
be directly coupled to the total mass of the detector, with a charge that is much weaker
than gravitational. Spherical detectors are more efficiently coupled to massive scalar waves,
but enhanced and advanced interferometers are already sufficient to provide significant con-
straints on a possible background of relic dilatons.

                                                    132
7     Relic photons, axions and CMB anisotropy

As discussed in the previous sections, the primordial spectrum of (scalar and tensor) metric
fluctuations, amplified by a phase of pre-big bang inflation, is characterized in general
by a positive and rather steep slope. Because of the high-frequency normalization of the
peak of the spectrum, controlled by the string scale, the amplitude of metric fluctuations
is strongly suppressed at the large-distance scales relevant to the anisotropy of the CMB
radiation observed by COBE [567, 77], or to the density fluctuations spectrum (see for
instance [509]) required by the standard mechanism of structure formation. It thus seems
difficult, in such a context, to generate a flat spectrum of scalar curvature perturbations
directly responsible for the above effects, unless we accept rather drastic modifications of
the pre-big bang kinematics, as recently suggested in [251, 227] (and briefly discussed in
Subsection 7.2).
     The slope of the spectrum, however, depends on the external “pump” field, which ampli-
fies the quantum fluctuations (see Section 4) and which contains, in general, the contribution
of all the components of the background (metric, dilaton, moduli fields, ...). Different fluc-
tuations are coupled to different pump fields and may have very different spectra, even in
the same background.
    It turns out, in particular, that the primordial spectrum of electromagnetic [305, 306]
and of “axionic” [175, 182] fluctuations (i.e. the fluctuations of the four-dimensional NS-
NS two-form and of other, string- and M-theory-motivated, antisymmetric tensors) may
be characterized by a slope much flatter than the slope of the metric perturbation spec-
trum (in some cases, even decreasing [135, 184, 119, 331, 226], depending on the coupling
to the moduli fields, on the anisotropy of space-time, and on the number of extra dimen-
sions). A flat and primordial distribution of (isocurvature) axionic fluctuations, in turn,
can directly generate a scale-invariant spectrum of CMB anisotropies through the “seed”
mechanism [223, 224, 324], which will be reported in Subsections 7.3, 7.4, or even generate
an adiabatic, scale-invariant spectrum of density and curvature perturbations through the
“curvaton” mechanism recently discussed in [241, 459, 487, 65, 502, 488, 100], and illustrated
in Subsection 7.5.
     In addition, the amplification of electromagnetic fluctuations, with a flat enough spec-
trum, seems to naturally provide the seed fields required to explain the origin of the magnetic
fields present on a galactic and intergalactic scale (see [345] for a recent review). We will
first illustrate this interesting possibility in the next subsection.


7.1   Large-scale magnetic fields and photon production

In the context of the pre-big bang scenario, the background evolution that amplifies metric
perturbations also amplifies the quantum fluctuation of the electromagnetic field, because


                                             133
of their direct coupling to the dilaton and to the moduli fields. For the heterotic string
model, such a coupling is described by the effective action [305]
                                                Z
                                            1           √
                               S=−                  d4 x −ge−φ Fµν F µν ,                     (7.1)
                                            4

where φ = Φ10 − ln V6 ≡ ln(g 2 ) controls the tree-level four-dimensional gauge coupling (Φ10
being the ten-dimensional dilaton field, and V6 the volume of the six-dimensional compact
internal space). The effective coupling to the external geometry may be different, however,
if the electromagnetic U (1) symmetry is a component of the Kaluza–Klein gauge group
produced in the compactification down to D = 4 dimensions [135] (see also [335]).
    The electromagnetic field is also coupled to the four-dimensional geometry, of course.
If such a coupling is minimal, however, it is also conformally invariant, and therefore does
not contributes to photon production in a conformally flat metric such as that of a typi-
cal inflationary background, unless conformal invariance is broken at the classical [589] or
quantum [218] level. Even in that case, however, photon production turns out to be rather
suppressed (with respect to graviton production, for instance).
    In order to discuss the amplification induced by the dilaton, in a conformally flat metric
gµν = a2 ηµν , it is convenient to use the radiation gauge A0 = 0, ∂i Ai = 0 explicitly. Because
of conformal invariance, the coupling to the metric disappears from the action (7.1); after
partial integration the action becomes, in this gauge,
                                        Z                                 
                                    1
                             S=             dηe−φ A′i Ai′ + Ai ∇2 Ai ,                        (7.2)
                                    2
and can be easily diagonalized by setting

                               ψi = zAi ,                      z = e−φ/2 .                    (7.3)

For each polarization mode we then obtain the effective action
                                        Z                                    !
                                 1                       z ′′
                            Sψ =            dη ψ + ψ∇ ψ + ψ 2 ,
                                                      ′2       2
                                                                                              (7.4)
                                 2                       z

and the canonical evolution equation
                    h           i                                      z ′′            ′′
               ψk′′ + k2 − V (η) ψk = 0,                     V (η) =        = eφ/2 e−φ/2 ,    (7.5)
                                                                       z
which is exactly the same as the graviton equation (4.56), with the only difference that now
the pump field is fully determined by the dilaton. If we use, in particular, the minimal model
of background introduced in Subsection 5.2, the spectrum of the amplified electromagnetic
fluctuations will be characterized by the same parameters as the graviton spectrum. In
such a case, the constraints on the electromagnetic spectrum will provide constraints on the
parameters of the model and then, indirectly, on the associated graviton spectrum.


                                                       134
    An important application of the “dilatonic” amplification of the electromagnetic fluc-
tuations is the possible production of “seed” for the galactic magnetic fields [305, 430].
The origin of the large-scale cosmic magnetic fields (with coherence scale >   ∼ 10 kpc, and
typical amplitude ∼ 10    −6 G) is in fact, to a large extent, still an open problem [345].
Almost all mechanisms invoked to generate the large-scale fields, e.g. the galactic “dy-
namo” [508, 632], require the presence of small, primordial seeds to trigger the subse-
quent magnetic amplification. Many mechanisms of seed production have been suggested
[365, 589, 595, 532, 263, 218, 157, 414] [81, 124, 338, 185] [67, 252, 201, 471, 291], trying
to bypass the difficulty –due to conformal invariance– that forbids a standard inflationary
amplification of the electromagnetic fluctuations. In the context of the pre-big bang models,
on the contrary, the seeds can be produced directly from the electromagnetic fluctuations of
the vacuum, thanks to the accelerated growth of the dilaton during the pre-big bang phase
(with possible additional contributions from dilaton oscillations, during preheating [328]).
   Consider in fact the two-parameter model of Eqs. (5.10):
                                                                            √
               dilaton phase,                      e−φ/2 ∼ (−η) 3/2 ,                       η < ηs ,
               string phase,                       e−φ/2 ∼ (−η)β ,                          ηs < η < η1 ,
                                                    −φ/2
               radiation era,                      e            ∼ const,                    η > η1 .           (7.6)

The effective dilatonic potential of Eq. (7.5) grows during the dilaton phase, keeps growing
during the string phase, and goes to zero in the radiation era. Because of the two background
transitions, there are two bands of the spectrum, corresponding to modes hitting the barrier
in the dilaton phase, ω < ωs , and in the string phase, ω > ωs . By applying the standard
procedure of Subsection 4.4 we obtain:
                                               3−2µ
                                           ω
       Ωem (ω, to ) ≃   g12 Ωγ (t0 )                    ,                                      ωs < ω < ω1 ,
                                           ω1
                                               1+2µ−      √                   √
                                                                3        4−       3
                                           ω1                        ω
                    ≃   g12 Ωγ (t0 )                                                    ,      ω < ωs          (7.7)
                                           ωs                        ω1
where µ = |β − 1/2|. By recalling that β = 1 + α (see Eq. (5.14)), we find that the
electromagnetic spectrum thus has the same parameters as the graviton spectrum (5.15),
but the slope is in general flatter. Even flatter spectra are possible for vector fields of
Kaluza–Klein origin [135].
   The generation of fluctuations of a strength large enough to seed the galactic dynamo
constrain the electromagnetic spectrum at the megaparsec scale, and imposes in particular
a bound that, in the most conservative form, can be written as follows [589]:
                               −34
          Ωem (ωG , tgal ) >
                           ∼ 10 Ωγ (tgal ),                           ωG ∼ (1 Mpc)−1 ∼ 10−14 Hz,               (7.8)

where tgal is the epoch of galaxy formation, i.e. agal ∼ 10−2 a0 . Remarkably, this condition
is compatible with the condition of negligible backreaction,

                                                 Ωem (ω) < Ωγ                                                  (7.9)

                                                        135
                                                                homogeneity
                                         0                                                  pulsar

                                                                        LIGO




                         log10(gs/g1)
                                        -10

                                                            LIG
                                        -20                    O             gal
                                                                                act
                                                                                   ic




                                                          ho
                                                                        ho              dyn




                                                            mo
                                                                          mo               amo




                                                              ge
                                        -30                                 ge




                                                                ne
                                                                              ne




                                                                  it
                                                                                it




                                                                    y
                                                                                  y


                                              0       5          10         15        20         25   30
                                                              log10(zs) = log10( s/ 1)




Figure 7.1: Allowed region in the parameter space of minimal pre-big bang models for the
production of seed fields for the galactic dynamo (shaded and hatched area). The other
two regions correspond to the production of a graviton background detectable by advanced
interferometric antennas.

(at all frequency scales), required by the consistency of the perturbative approach around
a homogeneous unperturbed background.
    There is indeed a wide region of parameter space in which the two conditions are con-
sistent without fine-tuning [305], as illustrated by the shaded and hatched areas of Fig. 7.1
(the hatched area refers to the dilaton branch of the spectrum, ω < ωs ; the shaded area
to the string branch, ω > ωs ). As shown in the picture, the production of seeds is strong
enough to satisfy the needs of the dynamo mechanism (Eq. (7.8)), provided the coupling is
sufficiently small at the beginning of the string phase:

                                                                   < − 20,
                                                  log10 exp(φs /2) ∼                                       (7.10)

and the duration in time of the string phase is sufficiently long:
                                                                 10  23
                                                   |ηs /η1 | >
                                                             ∼ 10 ∼ e ,                                    (7.11)

(in cosmic time, ∆t >  ∼ 23λs ). For illustrative purposes, the plots of Fig. 7.1 have been
constructed by taking g1 = 1 as a reference value. We also note that, besides the condition
(7.9), there are additional bounds on the energy spectrum of the magnetic fields because of a
possible (classical) production of gravitational waves induced by the magnetic stress tensor
[144]. Flat enough spectra are not strongly constrained, however, and we are assuming that
this is indeed the case for the electromagnetic distribution Ωem (ω) that we are considering.
Possible additional bounds on the primodial magnetic amplitude, due to Faraday rotation
effects, may follow in principle from future measurements of the CMB polarization, as
discussed in [329].
   Also shown in Fig. 7.1 are the allowed regions of parameter space compatible with
the detection of the relic graviton background produced in the context of minimal pre-big

                                                                    136
                                      -5




                         G h 100)
                                     -7.5




                         2
                                     -10




                         Log10 (
                                                 advanced
                                                interferometers
                                    -12.5



                                     -15

                                            0        2.5          5      7.5    10   12.5

                                                                  Log10 ( Hz)




Figure 7.2: Allowed region for the graviton spectrum in minimal pre-big bang models
(shaded area), assuming that the amplification of the electromagnetic fluctuations is strong
enough to seed the galactic dynamo.


bang models. We have used the typical sensitivity expected for the cross-correlation of
two second-generation interferometers, with the characteristic of Advanced LIGO (see Eq.
(5.42)). The allowed region is then defined by the condition ΩG (102 Hz) ≥ 10−10 , imposed
on the spectrum (5.15), together with the pulsar bound (5.3), and the condition of negligible
backreaction (ΩG < 1 at all ω and t), required for the validity of our perturbative compu-
tation of the spectrum around a homogeneous background (for a detailed implementation
of all bounds see [274]). It turns out that there are two allowed regions, corresponding to
tensor perturbations whose comoving amplitude stays constant outside the horizon during
the string phase (upper region) or grows (lower region). At the left-end of each region, the
marked triangular area corresponds to the possible detection of low-energy modes, crossing
the horizon during the dilaton-dominated phase; the rest of the allowed region refers to
modes crossing the horizon during the string phase.
     It should be noted that the gravitationally allowed regions have no possible overlap
with the electromagnetic ones, implying that the interesting phenomenological possibilities
of seed production and of graviton detection tend to exclude each other [274]. Indeed, if
we restrict to the class of backgrounds consistent with the production of magnetic seeds
(i.e. inside the shaded and hatched regions of Fig. 7.1), then the allowed slope of the
high-frequency (string) branch of the graviton spectrum is constrained to vary between 2
and 3 [278], with a consequent drastic reduction of the allowed region for ΩG , as illustrated
in Fig. 7.2. In that case, the graviton background is certainly outside the range of currently
available detectors (resonant bars and ground-based interferometers), which reach their
maximal sensitivity in the frequency band 102 – 103 Hz.
   According to the above analysis, a future detection of cosmic gravitons in the hertz to



                                                                  137
kilohertz range would seem to exclude a dilatonic origin of the seed magnetic fields, directly
amplified from the fluctuations of the vacuum. Conversely, an absence of signals from the
relic graviton background would seem to support, indirectly, a primordial dilatonic origin
of the cosmic magnetic fields. It must be stressed, however, that such conclusions, based
on the plots of Fig. 7.1, cannot be applied in general to the pre-big bang scenario: they are
only pertinent to the class of minimal models introduced in Subsection 5.2, and could be
evaded in the context of more complicated models of background.
    A final remark concerns the fact that the photon spectrum (7.7) is in general flatter than
the graviton spectrum (5.15), suggesting the possibility that the electromagnetic fluctua-
tions may also act as seeds for the (approximately) scale-invariant spectrum of temperature
anisotropies of the CMB radiation [306, 275] and for the density perturbations δρ/ρ required
for the structure formation. According to a detailed analysis [224], however, such a pos-
sibility has to be discarded in favour of an analogous possibility based on the fluctuations
of the fundamental antisymmetric tensors appearing in the bosonic sector of string theory,
which can be amplified with a perfectly flat spectrum [175, 182], as will be illustrated in
the next subsection.


7.2   Large-scale CMB anisotropy and axion production

In the context of the standard inflationary scenario, the observed CMB anisotropy, at very
large angular scales, can be consistently generated by the primordial spectrum of scalar
metric fluctuations Φk through the Sachs–Wolfe (SW) effect [546], (∆T /T )k ∼ Φk . Indeed,
when the metric fluctuations are directly amplified by the accelerated evolution of the
background, their spectral distribution is controlled by the value of the Hubble scale at
the time of horizon crossing, Φk ∼ (H/MP )k . For a standard de Sitter (or quasi-de Sitter)
inflationary solution, H is constant in time, so that the spectrum is scale-invariant. A
typical normalization of the spectrum, corresponding to inflation occurring roughly at the
GUT scale [422],
                            H      GUT curvature scale
                                ∼                        ∼ 10−5 ,                   (7.12)
                           MP         PLANCK scale
is thus perfectly consistent with the anisotropy observed at the present horizon scale [567,
77], ∆T /T ∼ 10−5 , and with the fact that the spectrum is scale-invariant.
    In the context of the pre-big bang scenario, on the contrary, the curvature scale grows
with time, so that the spectrum of the metric fluctuations tends to grow with frequency, as
illustrated in Section 4. In addition, the natural inflation scale corresponds to the string
scale, so that the normalization of the spectrum, at the end-point frequency k1 , is controlled
by the ratio            
                      H          STRING curvature scale
                              ∼                            ∼ 10−1 − 10−2 .               (7.13)
                      MP k1           PLANCK scale
As a consequence, for a typical pre-big bang model, the slope of the spectrum is too steep,


                                             138
and the normalization too high, to be compatible with the COBE observations. The slope
is so steep, however, that the contribution of the metric fluctuations to ∆T /T is certainly
negligible at the COBE scale. So, on the one hand there is no contradiction with observa-
tions, namely the COBE data cannot be used to rule out pre-big bang models [283]. On
the other hand, the problem remains: How to explain the observed CMB anisotropy?
    There are two possible answers to this question. The first one relies on somewhat
drastic modifications of the kinematics of the pre-big bang phase illustrated in the previous
sections, in such a way as to generate a primordial scale-invariant spectrum directly from
the amplification of the vacuum fluctuations of the metric, as in the standard inflationary
scenario. The second possibility relies on the indirect generation of scale-invariant metric
perturbations through the isocurvature fluctuations of another field, which may have a flat
spectrum even in the context of the pre-big bang solutions illustrated up to now in this
paper. We will discuss in detail the second possibility in the following subsections. Here we
will briefly report on the first possibility.
    There are at present two possible examples of pre-big bang models characterized by a
flat primordial spectrum of scalar perturbations [251, 227]. They are both based on the
introduction of a negative, exponential dilaton potential V (φ), which can be parametrized
in the E-frame as follows (in units MP2 = 2):
                                          √
                         V (φ) = −V0 e−φ/ ǫ ,            0 < ǫ < 1,                   (7.14)

and which is similar to the attractive potential existing between the colliding branes in the
context of the ekpyrotic scenario [412, 413].
   With such a potential, the corresponding (E-frame) pre-big bang solution describes an
accelerated contraction, controlled by the dimensionless parameter ǫ,

                                a(t) ∼ (−t)ǫ ∼ (−η)ǫ/(1−ǫ) ,                          (7.15)

which has to match the subsequent phase of decelerated, radiation-dominated expansion. By
assuming the existence of a non-singular bounce for the background solution, and assuming
the continuity of the Bardeen potential Φ and of the curvature perturbation ζ = v/z across
the bounce (their continuity is guaranteed by performing the matching on the constant
density hypersurface), one then finds that after the bounce the spectrum of Φ is determined
by the pump field (7.15), according to the rules derived in Section 4, namely
                                                          ǫ  1
                        k3 |Φk |2 ∼ k3−2ν ,         ν=      − .                       (7.16)
                                                         1−ǫ 2
A flat spectrum of scalar perturbations can then be obtained for ǫ = 2/3, as noted in [251],
corresponding to a dilaton potential that simulates a “dust” matter source with vanishing
effective pressure p = 0.
   Alternatively, as recently discussed in [227], a flat spectrum of scalar metric pertur-
bations can be obtained from the background solution (7.15) by assuming a very slow

                                              139
contraction, i.e. 0 < ǫ ≪ 1 as in the ekpyrotic scenario [412, 413], and assuming that the
matching to the expanding phase is performed across a hypersurface different from that
of constant energy density (for instance, across the zero-shear hypersurface [227]). In that
case the scalar spectrum after the bounce turns out to be different from Eq. (7.16), and is
given by
                                    k3 |Φk |2 ∼ k−2ǫ/(1−ǫ) .                          (7.17)
The case ǫ ≪ 1 thus reproduces a (nearly) flat spectrum, for both the pre-big bang and
ekpyrotic scenarios.
    This result can be easily explained by noting that, in the transition from a contracting
to an expanding phase, the asymptotic solutions of the scalar perturbation equations are
a linear combination of a constant and of a growing mode before the transition, and of
a constant and a decaying mode after it. Consider, for instance, a bouncing background
evolving from the contracting solution (7.15) valid for η < −η1 , to the standard, radiation-
dominated expansion a ∼ η, valid for η > η1 . The asymptotic solutions for the super-horizon
modes of the Bardeen potential, in the longitudinal gauge, can be written as

                                  A1 (k)
                         Φ1k (η) =         + B1 (k),          η < −η1 ,
                                  ηa21 (η)
                                  A2 (k)
                         Φ2k (η) = 2       + B2 (k),           η > η1 ,                (7.18)
                                  ηa2 (η)

where a1 ∼ (−η)ǫ/(1−ǫ) , and a2 ∼ η. Here A1 , B1 are determined by the initial normalization
to a vacuum fluctuation spectrum, while A2 , B2 are to be determined by the matching
conditions. It is then clear that different matching prescriptions may lead to different
solutions for B2 (k), the dominant mode of the post-big bang expanding phase, and then to
different final spectra.
   Given a space-like hypersurface, with normal vector nµ (η, ~x), the matching of two back-
ground manifolds [386] has to be performed on the induced metric qµν and on the extrinsic
curvature Kµν of the given hypersurface, where

                                                       1
                   qµν = gµν + nµ nν ,         Kµν =     (∇µ nν + ∇ν nµ ) .            (7.19)
                                                       2
For the given example of bouncing background the metric will be continuous, i.e. [gµν ]± = 0,
where
                             [g]± = lim+ g(η) − lim − g(−η);                           (7.20)
                                     η→η1         η→−η1

the curvature, however, will be characterized by a “jump” from negative to positive values,
[Kµν ]± = Sµν (if we neglect the high-energy corrections, which are expected to smooth out
the singularity, see Section 8). This introduces in general a surface stress tensor, which
in our case corresponds to a tension (i.e. to a negative pressure), needed to avoid the
singularity and to implement the transition from contraction to expansion.


                                            140
   The matching of the metric fluctuations can now be performed by perturbing the Israel
junction conditions on the chosen hypersurface, and leads to
                                                       h       i
                           [δgµν ]± = 0,               δKµν        = δSµν .              (7.21)
                                                               ±

On a general hypersurface one then obtains that the dominant coefficient B2 , determining
the post-big bang asymptotic expansion of the Bardeen potential, is in general related to
the pre-big bang coefficients A1 , B1 by [227]

                            B2 (k) = fA A1 (k) + fB B1 (k) + fs δps ,                    (7.22)

where fA , fb , fs are (possibly k-dependent) coefficients, and δps represents the perturbation
of the surface tension. The final spectrum k3 |B2 (k)|2 thus depends, in general, not only
on the choice of the matching hypersurface, but also on its perturbed tension (i.e. on the
details of the regularizing mechanism that is responsible for the bouncing transition).
    The matching across the hypersurface of total constant energy density (ρ + δρ = const)
gives in particular fA = 0 [227] so that, assuming a negligible δps , B2 simply inherits the
spectrum of the constant mode B1 , and one is led to the “standard” result (7.16) for the
scalar perturbation spectrum. The matching across a different hypersurface leaves, however,
fA 6= 0, so that the final spectrum is dominated by the growing mode of the pre-big bang
solution and (again assuming a negligible δps ) one is led to the “new” result reported in
Eq. (7.17), which leads to a flat spectrum for all backgrounds with ǫ ≪ 1.
    In the rest of this section we will adhere, however, to the standard matching prescription
at constant energy density, and we will concentrate on the alternative possibility of an indi-
rect generation of scale-invariant metric perturbations through the fluctuations of another
background field. Such an auxiliary field, in a string cosmology context, can be naturally
identified with the axion, whose quantum fluctuations, unlike the metric fluctuations, can
be directly amplified with a flat spectrum, even in the context of the minimal pre-big bang
models (without the contribution of a dilaton potential).
    To explain the reason of such a difference, first pointed out in [175, 182], let us consider
the four-dimensional reduced action for the antisymmetric tensor Hµνα ,
                                        Z
                                    1           √
                              S=            d4 x −ge−φ Hµνα H µνα ,                      (7.23)
                                   12
where
                    Hµνα = ∂µ Bνα + ∂ν Bαµ + ∂α Bµν ,              Bµν = −Bνµ .          (7.24)
The equation of motion,                 √                 
                                   ∂ν        −ge−φ H νµα = 0,                            (7.25)
can be automatically satisfied by introducing the “dual” axion field σ:
                                     eφ
                            H µνα = √ ǫµναβ ∂β σ ≡ eφ η µναβ ∂β σ                        (7.26)
                                      −g

                                                 141
(η µναβ is the totally antisymmetric, covariant tensor), and the effective action (7.23) may
be rewritten                            Z
                                      1       √
                                S=        d4 x −geφ ∂µ σ∂ µ σ                          (7.27)
                                      2
(note the coupling of σ to eφ instead of e−φ ). In conformal time, and for a conformally flat
metric                               Z                     
                                   1
                              S=       dηa2 eφ σ ′2 + σ∇2 σ ,                         (7.28)
                                   2
the action can be diagonalized by setting

                                        ψ = zσ,                       z = aeφ/2 ,                                    (7.29)

so that the evolution equation for the axion canonical variable ψ is formally the same,
                                    h           i
                          ψk′′ + k2 − V (η) ψk = 0,                         V (η) = z ′′ /z,                         (7.30)

but is characterized by a pump field z different from that of gravitons or photons. As-
suming a smooth evolution from a power-law pre-big bang background, with z ∼ |η|α , to
the standard radiation era, the axion spectrum Ωσ is then determined by the background
kinematics according to the general prescriptions of Subsection 4.4, i.e.

                  Ωσ (ω) ∼ ω 3−2ν ,                       ν = |α − 1/2|,                     z ∼ |η|α .              (7.31)

    Consider now the low-energy branch of the spectrum, for modes hitting the effective
potential barrier during a higher-dimensional dilaton-driven phase, which we assume to be
characterized by three isotropically expanding dimensions, with scale factor a(η), and n
“internal” dimensions, with scale factor bi (η). The background evolution is known, deter-
mined by the d = 3 + n, anisotropic, S-frame solutions of the string effective action, Eqs.
(2.88) and (2.89). The scale factors, and the dimensionally reduced dilaton φ, can then be
expressed in conformal time as
                                                                                         P
                  β0 /(1−β0 )                       βi /(1−β0 )                           i βi + 3β0 − 1
          a ∼ |η|               ,         bi ∼ |η|                ,          Φd =                          ln |η|,
                                                                                              1 − β0
                                          X                3β0 − 1
          φ = Φd − ln Vn = Φd −                ln bi ∼             ln |η|,                                           (7.32)
                                           i
                                                           1 − β0

where β0 , βi are n + 1 parameters related by the “Kasner-like” condition
                                                          X
                                               3β02 +           βi2 = 1                                              (7.33)
                                                           i

(β0 < 0 for inflationary expansion), and Φd is the dilaton field appearing in the d-dimensional,
non-reduced action,
              Z                                       Z                              Z
                    d+1    p            −Φd                 4   √          −Φd               √
                  d       x −gd+1 e            = Vn       d x −g4 e              =       d4 x −g4 e−φ .              (7.34)


                                                          142
Combining the behaviour of a and φ we obtain the power α of the pump field, and the
corresponding spectral index, which are in general given by :
                         5β0 − 1                                        3β0 + 1
                 α=−               ,         3 − 2ν = 3 − |2α − 1| =            .           (7.35)
                        2(1 − β0 )                                      1 − β0

    In the particular case of an isotropic n-dimensional subspace, βi = β, 3β02 + nβ 2 = 1,
one can also re-express the spectral index (7.35) in terms of the conformal power s =
β/(1 − β0 ) of the modulus, as originally done in [175], or even in terms of a parameter
r = (V̇n /2Vn )(V̇3 /V3 )−1 , measuring the relative evolution in time of the external and internal
volumes [479]. What is important, in our context, is that a flat spectrum (i.e. Ωσ =
const, 3 − 2ν = 0) is now perfectly allowed for β0 = −1/3. For an isotropic d-dimensional
                                           √
background, in particular, β0 = −1/ d, so that a flat spectrum exactly corresponds to
d = 9, i.e. just the number of dimensions of critical superstring theory! (see also [135]). Flat
(or nearly flat) spectra are also possible for different exact solutions of the low-energy string
effective action [177, 178, 324], even in four dimensions if the background is anisotropic [331],
or if the dilaton has an appropriate exponential potential and it is non-minimally coupled
to the axion [251].
    It should be stressed that for gravitons, on the contrary, a flat spectrum cannot be
obtained in the above background, quite irrespective of the number and dynamics of the
internal dimensions. By using Eq. (7.32) we find indeed that, independently of β0 , βi , the
graviton pump field ae−φ always has the same power, α = 1/2,

                                       z = ae−φ/2 ∼ |η|1/2 ,                                (7.36)

so that the spectrum (modulo logarithmic corrections) is always characterized by the known
cubic slope 3 − 2ν = 3 − |2α − 1| = 3. A flat spectrum, in the background (7.32), is also
forbidden for heterotic photons (coupled to the dilaton as in the example discussed in the
previous subsection). The situation is different, however, for Kaluza–Klein photons, whose
spectrum is more sensitive to the dynamics of the internal dimensions [135].
    It is important to note, finally, that in the different backgrounds obtained through
SL(2, R) transformations mixing the axion and dilaton fields, different evolution equations
are generally obtained for the metric, the dilaton, and the axion fluctuations. After a
diagonalization, and a redefinition of new canonical variables, one finds however that the
evolution equations for the two fundamental scalar degrees of freedom, i.e. the gauge-
invariant (Bardeen) potential and the pseudoscalar axion field, are unaltered by the SL(2, R)
transformation. Thus, the blue spectral tilt of metric perturbations and a possibly flat slope
of the axion spectrum remain the same as in the standard, dilaton-dominated background
solutions [175, 182] (see also [437] for more details on the axion spectra).
    A flat, primordial spectrum of axion fluctuations can be used for an indirect generation
of the observed CMB anisotropies in two ways. A first possibility is the “seed” mechanism


                                               143
[220, 221]: indeed, even if the axion fluctuations are negligible as sources of the metric
background, ρσ ≪ ρc , their inhomogeneous stress tensor generates metric fluctuations ac-
cording to the standard gravitational equations, and the metric, in its turn, is source of the
temperature anisotropies through the usual Sachs–Wolfe effect:

                                    ρσ /ρc ∼ Φ ∼ ∆T /T .                                (7.37)

    Such an indirect production of anisotropies could work, in principle, because the con-
tribution (7.37) to ∆T /T is quadratic in the axion field, and not linear as in the case of
metric perturbations. So, even if the amplitude of the axion fluctuations is still normalized
at the string curvature scale, the square of the amplitude is not very far from the expected
value 10−5 :                                                      
                      ∆T            2     STRING curvature scale 2
                           ∼Φ∼σ ∼                                     .                (7.38)
                       T                       PLANCK scale
The string normalization (7.13), on the other hand, is imposed at the end point of the spec-
trum (typically, at the gigahertz scale), while COBE observations constrain the spectrum
at the present horizon scale (∼ 10−18 Hz): it is then evident that a very small, “blue” tilt in
the axion spectrum is sufficient to make compatible the string and COBE normalizations,
Eqs. (7.38) and (7.12).
    The seed mechanism, however, seems to have difficulties in reproducing the peak struc-
ture of the observed anisotropies at smaller angular scales, as will be discussed in Subsection
7.3. A more realistic scenario is probably offered by the “curvaton” mechanism [459]: if
the axion is heavy enough, the initial and flat primordial spectrum of isocurvature axion
fluctuations can be eventually converted, after the axion decay, into a final scale-invariant
spectrum of curvature fluctuations. The standard results for the temperature anisotropies
then apply, with the only difference that the metric perturbations are not primordial, but
indirectly generated by the axion decay. This possibility will be discussed in Subsection
7.5, after a brief report on the seed mechanism, which will be presented in the next two
subsections.


7.3   Massless axions as seeds

The quantum fluctuations of the so-called “universal” (or Kalb-Ramond) axion σ (i.e. the
dual of the field strength of the NS-NS two-form appearing in the string effective ac-
tion) can be amplified with a scale-invariant distribution of the spectral energy density,
Ωσ (k, η) = ρ−1
             c (dρσ (k, η)/ρc d ln k) (as shown in the previous subsection); they are thus a
possible candidate for seeding the large-scale anisotropy in the context of the pre-big bang
scenario. To illustrate this possibility we will proceed in two steps.
   We will first show that the scalar metric fluctuation on a given scale k, at the time
the scale re-enters the horizon, is precisely determined by the axion energy distribution


                                             144
evaluated at the conformal time of re-entry, ηre ≃ k−1 :

                                         Φk (ηre ) ∼ Ωσ (k, ηre ).                       (7.39)

Secondly, we will show that the dominant contribution of a given scale to the Sachs–Wolfe
effect comes from the time that scale re-enters the horizon, in such a way that the final
temperature spectrum exactly reproduces the primordial seed spectrum:

                                   (∆T /T )k ∼ Φk (ηre ) ∼ Ωσ (k, ηre ).                 (7.40)

These two results are far from being trivial, as they are consequences of the particular time
dependence of the Bardeen spectrum induced by axion fluctuations (the same results do
not apply, for instance, to the case of electromagnetic fluctuations). We will give here only
a sketch of the arguments leading to the above results, which are interesting in themselves,
apart from their possible string cosmology applications. For a detailed derivation we refer
the reader to the original papers [223, 224].
    Let us first compute the spectrum of metric perturbations seeded by a flat, primordial
distribution of axion fluctuations. We define, as usual, the power spectrum of the Bardeen
potential, PΦ (k), in terms of the Fourier transform of the two-point correlation function,
                               Z
                                     d3 k ik·(x−x′ )
                                          e          PΦ (k) = hΦ(x)Φ(x′ )i               (7.41)
                                   (2πk)3
(the brackets denote spatial average, or expectation value if perturbations are quantized),
and we recall that the square root of this function, evaluated at a comoving distance k−1 ,
represents the typical amplitude of fluctuations on a scale k:
                                                1/2
                                   hΦ(x)Φ(x′ )i |x−x′ |=k−1 ∼ k3/2 |Φk |                 (7.42)

(see also Eq. (4.69)). We also define the power spectrum of the seed stress tensor, in the
same way (no sum over µ, ν):
                      Z
                            d3 k ik·(x−x′ ) ν
                                 e         Pµ (k) = hTµν (x)Tµν (x′ )i − hTµν (x)i2 .    (7.43)
                          (2πk)3

    Metric fluctuations and seed fluctuations, on the other hand, are related by the cosmo-
logical perturbation equations [221]. By taking into account the important contribution of
the off-diagonal components of the axion stress tensor one finds, typically, that the Bardeen
spectrum PΦ and axion energy–density spectrum Pρ are related by:
                                                     2
                                       1/2             a
                                      PΦ (k) ∼ G           Pρ1/2 (k),                    (7.44)
                                                       k
where ρ = T00 , and
               Z
                     d3 k ik·(x−x′ )
                          e          Pρ (k) = hρσ (x)ρσ (x′ )i − hρσ (x)i2
                   (2πk)3
                                            ∼ hσ ′2 (x)σ ′2 (x′ )i − hσ ′2 (x)i2 + ...   (7.45)

                                                   145
Note that the two-point correlation function of the energy density becomes a four-point
function of the seed field, since the energy is quadratic in the axion field.
   Using now the stochastic average condition for the axion field,

                           hσ ′ (k, η)σ ′∗ (k′ , η)i = (2π)3 δ3 (k − k′ )Σ(k, η),                       (7.46)

it turns out that the energy–density spectrum reduces to a convolution of Fourier transforms,
                                                 Z
                                      k3
                              Pρ (k) ∼ 4             d3 p Σ(p)Σ(|k − p|) + ... .                        (7.47)
                                      a
Also, for a flat enough axion spectrum, one finds that the above integral is dominated by the
region pη ∼ 1 [224]. By expressing the convolution through the spectral energy density Ωσ ,
evaluating the Bardeen potential at the time of re-entry ηre ∼ k−1 , and using Eq. (7.44),
one is finally led to relating the Bardeen spectrum and the axion spectrum as follows:
                               1/2
                             PΦ (k, ηre ) ∼ k3/2 |Φk (ηre )| ∼ Ωσ (k, ηre ).                            (7.48)

We should now explain why we are interested in the metric fluctuations evaluated at the
time of re-entry.
   To this purpose, let us compute the seed contribution to ∆T /T . In the multipole
expansion of the temperature anisotropies (in terms of the Legendre polynomials Pℓ ),
                                    
                    δT    δT                                      1 X
                       (n) (n′ )                         =            (2ℓ + 1)Cℓ Pℓ (cos ϑ) ,           (7.49)
                     T     T             (n·n′ ≡cos ϑ)
                                                                 4π ℓ

the coefficients Cℓ , at very large angular scales (ℓ ≪ 100), are determined by the Sachs–
Wolfe effect as [221]:
                    Z              *"Z                                                       #2 +
              2                        kη0
       CℓSW =           d (ln k)               d(kη) k   3/2
                                                               (Ψ + Φ)(k, η)jℓ′ (kη0 − kη)          .   (7.50)
                π                     kηdec

Here Φ and Ψ are the two independent components of the gauge-invariant Bardeen po-
tential (see Subsection 4.2), jℓ are the spherical Bessel functions, and a prime denotes the
derivative with respect to their argument. Equation (7.50) takes into account both the
“ordinary” and the “integrated” Sachs–Wolfe contribution, namely the complete distortion
of the geodesics of the CMB photons (due to shifts in the gravitational potential), from the
time of decoupling ηdec down to the present time η0 . By inserting the Bardeen potential
determined by the axion field, we find that the time-integral is dominated by the region
kη ∼ 1. Using Eq. (7.48) we finally obtain
                                           Z
                              CℓSW ∼           d(ln k) k3 |Φk (ηre )|2 |jℓ (kη0 )|2 ,                   (7.51)

which gives the multipole coefficients in terms of the axion distribution Ωσ (k, ηre ), through
Eq. (7.48). This explains why it was important to evaluate the Bardeen spectrum at the
time of re-entry, ηre ∼ k−1 .

                                                         146
    From this final expression we can extract, in particular, the value of the quadrupole
coefficient C2 [224]:
                                                     
                                 2               Ms 4 k0 n−1
                          C2 ≃ Ωσ (k0 , η0 ) ≃                 ,                   (7.52)
                                                 MP    k1
where n is the spectral index (sufficiently near to 1) characterizing the primordial axion
distribution, k0 is the comoving scale of the present horizon, and k1 the end point of the
spectrum, namely the maximal amplified comoving frequency. We have assumed, in the
context of a minimal model of pre-big bang, that the peak amplitude of the axion spectrum,
at the end-point frequency, is controlled by the fundamental ratio between string and Planck
masses, as it was for the graviton and dilaton spectra computed in the previous sections.
Note, however, that in the low-frequency band corresponding to the large-scale observations
the axion spectrum contains the enhancement factor (k/keq )−2 (see Eq. (5.2)), which for
k = k0 almost exactly cancels the present radiation energy density, Ωγ (t0 ) ∼ 10−4 .
    The quadrupole coefficient, on the other hand, is at present determined by COBE as
[50]
                                C2 = (1.9 ± 0.23) × 10−10 .                      (7.53)
This experimental value, inserted into Eq. (7.52), provides an interesting, direct rela-
tion between the string mass and the spectral index of the temperature anisotropy. Using
k1 /k0 ≃ (Ms /MP )1/2 1029 (see Eq. (5.16)), and using (as a reference value) the following
bounds on the spectral index [78]:
                                        1 ≤ n ≤ 1.4                                   (7.54)
(we have excluded here the allowed values 0.9 ≤ n ≤ 1, to avoid introducing an infrared
cut-off in the massless axion spectrum), we obtain in fact an allowed range for the string-
                   < Ms /MP ∼
mass scale, 0.0037 ∼           < 3.2, which is compatible with the theoretical expectations
            < Ms /MP ∼
[403], 0.01 ∼          < 0.1. Conversely, the theoretically expected range for Ms implies a
                    <n∼
spectral index 1.06 ∼    < 1.2, which is also in agreement with the observational results.

    This promising result, however, is only a first step towards a more complete comparison
of the seed model with observations, comparison that must include also smaller angular
scales, where precise experimental data have recently been obtained [483, 475, 203, 363],
and will become available in the next few years [470, 521].
    A numerical computation of the anisotropy power spectrum (7.50), at intermediate
angular scales (up to ℓ ∼ 103 ), has already been performed as reported in [479, 608]. The
resulting spectrum shows the familiar peak structure, typical of all inflationary models.
However, as was already shown very clearly by a first analysis [479], the height and the
position of the first acoustic peak can be reproduced (at least approximately) only if the
axion spectrum grows fast enough with frequency. In particular, using the notation of the
previous subsection, one must require at least 3 − 2ν > 0.1 (but 3 − 2ν >
                                                                        ∼ 0.3 seems to be
favoured by the data).



                                            147
    This requirement, however, is in general incompatible with the high-frequency normal-
ization typical of the pre-big bang scenario (if the amplitude is large enough to match
observations at the COBE scale and the slope is too steep, then the energy density blows
up and becomes overcritical at the string scale).
    A possible solution, suggested in [479], exists in the context of “non-minimal” models
of background, leading to a slope that is steep enough at low frequency, and flatter at
high frequency, so as it limits the peak value. Since the axion spectrum depends both on
the number and on the kinematics of the internal dimensions (see Subsection 7.2), such a
spectrum could be produced during a phase of dynamical dimensional reduction, in which
the low-frequency modes are frozen outside the horizon while the Universe is dimensionally
different from the subsequent phase of freezing of the high-frequency modes.
    A more detailed analysis [608], based on the recent BOOMERanG-98 [203] and MAXIMA-
1 [363] data, shows indeed that it is not impossible to fit the height of the first acoustic
peak, observed around ℓ ∼ 200, by using a (pre-big bang-motivated) axion spectrum, which
grows with a steep slope up to a limiting scale kb , and which is pretty flat above kb :

                3 − 2ν ≃ 0.33,        k < kb ,         3 − 2ν ≃ 0,      k > kb .         (7.55)

In order to be efficient, the break point kb has to be around the equilibrium scale, kb ∼ keq .
However, the precise position of the break is not strongly constrained, and one may exploit
the possibility of lowering the break scale, to lower the height of the second (and subsequent)
acoustic peaks, for a better comparison with data (such a shift does not substantially affect
the height of the first peak).
   A break in the axion spectrum is thus effective to match the height of the peaks, but is
not sufficient to fit the position of the first acoustic peak, determined with small uncertainty
by recent data [483, 475, 203, 363] around ℓ ∼ 200. The position depends on the full set of
parameters of a given cosmological model and, in the context of the seed mechanism based
on massless axions, a peak at ℓ ∼ 200 seems to require a moderately closed Universe , with
Ωm + ΩΛ > 1. For instance [608],

                                 Ωm ≃ 0.4,             ΩΛ ≃ 0.85                         (7.56)

provides a good fit of the data, also compatible with current supernovae results [517]. It
should be noted, to confirm the validity of a such model, that if the axion spectrum has
a break it is also possible to fit the dark-matter power spectrum, in reasonable agreement
with observations.
     However, even adjusting the break point kb and the value of Ωm + ΩΛ , the width of the
peak is still not in very good agreement with the present data, as the resulting normalized χ2
is about 1.8, which confirms the model only at the 30% confidence level [608]. Nonetheless,
it is important to stress that the position of the second acoustic peak predicted by the axion
model is different from the one indicated by the standard inflationary predictions (and by

                                                 148
present data). In addition, the axion model also predicts a small peak, or “hump”, around
ℓ ∼ 100, due to the “isocurvature” (rather than adiabatic, i.e. isoentropic) nature of the
induced metric perturbations. These two peculiar predictions will be extremely important
to confirm or disprove definitely the axion model, when the future satellite observations
[470, 521] will become available.
   Also, the axion fluctuations σk are described by a Gaussian, stochastic variable, but
the induced metric fluctuations depend on the axion energy–momentum tensor: they are
quadratic in σk and therefore non-Gaussian, in general. This may change the estimate of
the confidence level (i.e. of the probability) that the axion model leads to the measured
CMB anisotropy spectrum.
    It should be stressed, to conclude this subsection, that the isocurvature character of the
primordial axion spectrum considered here is due to the fact that the axions are treated as
seeds, i.e. inhomogeneous fluctuations of a background that is not axion-dominated. As a
consequence, the predicted anisotropies are different from previous models of isocurvature
axion perturbations [42, 558, 496]. So, even if this seed mechanism based on isocurvature
axion perturbations were definitely ruled out by future observations, this would not preclude
the possibility of adiabatic axion perturbations (see for instance [409]), where the axions
produced during the phase of pre-big bang inflation represent a significant fraction of the
present cold dark-matter density.


7.4   Massive axion spectra

In the previous subsection we have discussed the CMB anisotropies seeded by a stochastic
background of massless axion fluctuations, amplified by a phase of pre-big bang inflation.
It is possible, or even likely, however, that the axion fluctuations amplified by inflation
become massive in the post-inflationary era: it is thus important, also in view of future
applications other than the seed mechanism, to discuss whether, even in the massive case,
the string normalization of the primordial spectrum may be consistent with the large-scale
normalization determined by the CMB anisotropy, in spite of some important differences
that appear in the spectrum and in the computation of the Sachs–Wolfe effect.
    In this subsection we shall keep assuming that the axion background is negligible,
hσi = 0, and that the whole contribution to the axion energy density ρσ comes from the
vacuum fluctuations, as in the previous subsection. There are, however, various important
differences. A first difference between the massless and massive axion cases concerns the
relation between ρσ and the Bardeen potential Φ. In the massless case the perturbation
equations, taking into account the important contribution of all the off-diagonal terms of
the axion stress tensor, lead to
                                             2
                                             a
                                    Φk ≃ G        ρσ (k)                             (7.57)
                                             k
(see Eq. (7.44)). In the massive case, on the contrary, the axion stress tensor can be

                                             149
approximated as a diagonal, perfect-fluid stress tensor, and we obtain [324]

                                       Φk ∼ Ga2 η 2 ρσ (k).                               (7.58)

Also, the convolution (7.47) for the axion energy density is dominated by the region p ∼ η −1
in the massless case, and by p ∼ k in the massive case. In the massless case the integrated
Sachs–Wolfe effect is dominant, while it is the ordinary one that dominates in the massive
case [324].
    In spite of these differences, the final result for the temperature anisotropies is the same
as before, with the quadrupole coefficient determined by the axion spectral energy density
as [324]
                                         C2 ≃ Ω2σ (k0 , η0 ).                              (7.59)
In the massive case, however, the axion spectrum is affected by non-relativistic corrections,
which are to be computed by including the mass contribution to the canonical evolution
equation (7.30):                            
                                 z ′′
                     ψk′′ + k2 −      + m2 a2 ψk = 0,        ψk = zσk .                (7.60)
                                 z

   To this purpose, let us consider a simple background transition at η = η1 , from an initial
pre-big bang phase in which the axion is massless, to a final radiation-dominated phase in
which the dilaton freezes to its present value, φ = const, and the axion acquires a mass,
which is small in string units. Therefore, for η < η1 , we then have m = 0, and the usual
Hankel solution is normalized to a vacuum fluctuation spectrum (see Section 4.4),
                                         √
                                           π 1/2 (2)
                                ψk (η) =     |η| Hν (|kη|),                            (7.61)
                                          2

where ν depends on the pre-big bang evolution of the pump field z = aeφ/2 . In the subse-
quent radiation era, η > η1 , the effective potential z ′′ /z is vanishing, and the perturbation
equation reduces to                                
                                  ψk′′ + k2 + α2 η 2 ψk = 0,                              (7.62)
where we have put
                           m2 a2 = α2 η 2 ,             α = mH1 a21 ,                     (7.63)
using the time behaviour of the scale factor a ∼ η.
    For the high-frequency modes that are relativistic at the transition scale, m ≪ k/a1 ,
the mass term can be neglected, and we can match the solution (7.61) to the plane-wave
solution
                                 1 h                         i
                          ψk = √     c+ (k)e−ikη + c− (k)eikη ,                    (7.64)
                                 2k
to obtain:
                        c± = ±c(k)e±ikη ,         |c(k)| ≃ (k/k1 )−ν−1/2                  (7.65)


                                               150
(we neglect, for simplicity, numerical factors of order 1, which will be absorbed into the
uncertainty relative to the inflation scale, represented by the overall numerical coefficient g1
in front of the final spectrum.) In the relativistic regime the amplified axion perturbation
then takes the form:
                                               c(k)
                                    σ(k, η) = √ sin(kη),                                  (7.66)
                                               a k
and the corresponding energy density, ρrel            ′   2
                                            σ (k) ∼ (σ /a) , integrated over all modes, leads
to the spectral distribution (4.102), and to the usual relativistic spectrum (normalized to
critical units):
                                            3−2ν
                                  2         p
                     Ωσ (p, t) = g1 Ωγ (t)          ,        m < p < p1 ,              (7.67)
                                            p1
where p = k/a is the proper momentum (see Subsection 4.4).
    In the radiation era the proper momentum is redshifted with respect to the rest mass,
and all axion modes tend to become non-relativistic. When the mass term is no longer
negligible, on the other hand, the general solution of Eq. (7.62) can be written in terms
of parabolic cylinder functions [5]. For an approximate estimate of the axion field in the
non-relativistic regime, however, it is convenient to distinguish two cases, depending on
whether a mode k becomes non-relativistic inside or outside the horizon. Defining as km
the limiting comoving frequency of a mode that becomes non-relativistic (km = mam ) at
the time it re-enters the horizon (km = Hm am ), we find, in the radiation era [324],
                                                           1/2
                                     H m am            m
                              km =          H1 a1 = k1             .                     (7.68)
                                     H 1 a1            H1
We will consider the two cases k ≫ km and k ≪ km separately.
   In the first case we can rewrite Eq. (7.62) as
                                 !
                d2 ψk     x2
                      +      − b ψk = 0,       x = η(2α)1/2 ,      − b = k2 /2α,         (7.69)
                 dx2      4

and the general solution we give has the form

                                ψ = AW (b, x) + BW (b, −x),                              (7.70)

where W (b, x) are the Weber parabolic cylinder functions (see [5], Chap. 19). In order to
fix the integration constants A and B we can match the solutions (7.70) and (7.66) in the
relativistic limit where
                                  k2      k2    −4b
                                  2  2
                                       =  2  2
                                               = 2 ≫ 1.                             (7.71)
                                m a      α η     x
In this limit, since we are considering modes that become non-relativistic when they are
already inside the horizon,
                                     
                                    k 2 k2
                                        ∼    ∼ (−b) ≫ 1,                          (7.72)
                                   km      α

                                              151
we can expand the W functions for b large with x moderate [5]. Matching to the plane-wave
solution (7.64), we obtain A = 0, and

                                                      c(k)
                                               ψk ≃        W (b, −x).                                  (7.73)
                                                      α1/4
In the opposite, non-relativistic limit x2 ≫ |4b|, the expansion of the Weber functions gives
[5]                                                    
                                           c(k)         m
                                    ψk ≃      1/2
                                                  sin                                  (7.74)
                                          (αη)          H
(we have used x2 /4 = maη/2 ∼ m/H). The corresponding axion field is then (inside the
horizon)                                  
                                c(k)      m
                      σ(k, η) = √    sin     ,       k > km .                  (7.75)
                               a ma       H
The associated energy density, ρnon−rel
                                  σ      (k) ∼ (σ ′ /a)2 ∼ (ma/k)ρrelσ (k), differs from the
previous one by the non-relativistic rescaling m/p, thus leading to the spectrum
                                              2         3         2−2ν
                                 m        H1          a1          p
                 Ωσ (p, t) = g12                                                 ,       pm < p < m,   (7.76)
                                 H1       H           a           p1

where pm = km /a (see Eq. (7.67)).
   Finally, we consider the case of a mode that becomes non-relativistic when it is still
outside the horizon, k ≪ km . In this case, we cannot use the large |b| expansion as |b| < 1,
and it is convenient to express the general solution of Eq. (7.69) in the form

                                      ψ = Ay1 (b, x) + By2 (b, x) ,                                    (7.77)

where y1 and y2 are the even and odd parts of the parabolic cylinder functions [5]. The
matching to (7.66), in the relativistic limit x → 0, gives A = 0 and
                                                             1/2
                                                 k
                                      ψk ≃ c(k)                        y2 (b, x).                      (7.78)
                                                2α

In the non-relativistic limit x2 ≫ |b| we use the relation [5]

                                                           1   x2
                            y2 ∼ [W (b, x) − W (b, −x)] ∼ √ sin ,                                      (7.79)
                                                            x  4

which leads to                                                   !1/4               
                                      c(k)                  k2              m
                                ψk ≃                                    sin   ,                        (7.80)
                                     (αη)1/2                α               H
from which
                                              1/2         1/4               
                        c(k)              k             H1              m
              σ(k, η) = √                                           sin   ,                   k < km   (7.81)
                       a ma               k1            m               H

                                                            152
with an associated spectrum
                                  r                2         3         3−2ν
                                      m        H1          a1          p
                Ωσ (p, t) = g12                                                     ,       p < pm ,              (7.82)
                                      H1       H           a           p1
reproducing the low frequency band of the non-relativistic spectrum already presented in
the case of dilatons (see Eq. (6.13)).
    However, the above result is valid only if the axion field becomes massive before the
limiting scale pm crosses the horizon. Let us call Tm the temperature scale at which the
mass turns on (typically, Tm ∼ 100 MeV if axions become massive at the epoch of chiral
symmetry breaking) and pT the proper frequency re-entering the horizon precisely at the
same epoch. The present value of pT is then
                                                                        
                                                                      Tm
                                           pT (η0 ) ≃ peq                ,                                        (7.83)
                                                                      eV

and the spectrum (7.82) is valid for pm < pT , namely for m/Heq < (Tm /eV)2 . In the
opposite case, pm > pT , the role of the transition frequency, which separates modes that
become non-relativistic inside and outside the horizon, is played by pT , and the lowest-
frequency band of the non-relativistic spectrum (7.82) has to be replaced by [324]:
                                            2         3         3−2µ                        !1/2         
                  m           eV        H1            a1          p                           m              eV
 Ωσ (p, t) = g12 p                                                             , p < pT ,                             >1
                 H1 Heq       Tm        H             a           p1                          Heq            Tm
                                                                                    (7.84)
(such a spectrum can be easily obtained by imposing the continuity with (7.76) at p = pT ).
     In both cases, as clearly illustrated in Fig. 7.3, the effect of non-relativistic corrections
is to enhance the amplitude of the spectrum at low frequency. The enhancement is pro-
portional to the square root of the axion mass according to Eq. (7.82), if the scale pm is
still outside the horizon at the time when axions become massive. In the opposite case, the
enhancement is linear in the axion mass, according to Eq. (7.84). In both cases the slope
is the same as that of the massless spectrum, 3 − 2ν.
    Since the amplitude of the spectrum now depends on the axion mass, the condition
imposed by the COBE normalization provides a constraint on the allowed range of masses.
This might represent a problem, in general: since the slope cannot be too steep at low
frequency (according to Eq. (7.54)), the allowed mass has to be small enough, typically in
                                                                                <m∼
the range of Heq . An explicit analysis [224] then leads to the window 10−27 eV ∼ < 10−17
eV.
   It should be noted, at this point, that the mass of an axion field coupled to matter
with a typical gravitational strength is not significantly constrained (unlike the dilaton
mass) by the present gravitational experiments, which are indeed to be performed with
polarized bodies [538] to be sensitive to pseudoscalar interactions. Also, the Kalb-Ramond
(KR) axion, even if (gravitationally) coupled to the QCD topological current, is not to be

                                                           153
                                    non-relativistic            relativistic




                          (p)
                          Log 10
                                   outside        inside
                                   horizon        horizon



                                             pm             m                  p1
                                                       Log 10 ( p)



Figure 7.3: Mass-dependent enhancement of the spectrum at low frequency, due to non-
relativistic corrections. If the slope is sufficiently flat, 3 − 2ν < 1, then the non-relativistic
part of the spectrum may have a peak in correspondence of the frequency mode pm that
becomes non-relativistic at the time it re-enters the horizon.

necessarily identified with the “invisible” axion [415] responsible for solving the strong CP
problem. Other, more strongly coupled pseudoscalars, can play the traditional axion’s role.
    In that case, the standard Weinberg–Wilczek formula [619, 623] would give the mass of
the appropriate combination of pseudoscalars, which is coupled to the topological charge,
while the KR axion would mostly lie along the orthogonal combinations, which remain
(almost) massless. In this context it is thus possible that KR axions are produced neither
from an initial misalignment of the QCD vacuum angle, nor from the decay of axionic cosmic
strings, so that existing cosmological bounds on the axion mass [566] can be evaded. In
spite of all this, it is quite likely that the KR axion will be heavier than 10−17 eV, in which
case, using the above spectra, it would be impossible even in principle to seed the observed
CMB anisotropies.
    This conclusion, based on the effect illustrated in Fig. 7.3, refers however to a relativistic
spectrum characterized by a constant slope. It is quite easy to imagine, however, and to
implement in practice, a model of background in which the relativistic axion spectrum is
sufficiently flat at low frequency (as required by a fit of the large-scale anisotropy), and
much steeper at high frequency. A simple example is illustrated in Fig. 7.4, where we
have compared two spectra. The top one is flat everywhere, except for modes becoming
non-relativistic outside the horizon. The other one has a relativistic branch, which is flat at
low frequency p < ps , and steeper at high frequency p > ps . It is evident that the steeper
and the longer the high-frequency branch of the spectrum, the larger is the suppression of
the amplitude at low frequency, and the larger is the axion mass allowed by the COBE
normalization at the present Hubble scale ω = ω0 .
   This possibility has been analysed through an explicit two-parameter model of back-


                                                    154
                         (p)
                         Log 10     po   pm   m        ps    p1
                                               Log 10 ( p)



Figure 7.4: Two examples of axion spectra with non-relativistic corrections. Note the
common normalization at the end-point frequency p1 , in spite of the different slopes in the
different frequency regimes.


ground [324], based on exact solutions of the low-energy string-cosmology equations with
classical string sources [321, 302, 303]. By fixing the high-frequency normalization at
M s/MP = 10−2 , the low-frequency slope at n = 1.2, and the temperature of mass gen-
eration at T = 100 MeV, we can use as parameters the slope and the duration of the
high-frequency part of the spectrum, measured in particular by x = log(p1 /ps ) > 0 and by
the corresponding variation of the pump field, y = log(zs /z1 ) < 0. By imposing the COBE
normalization (7.59), Ωσ (p0 ) ≃ 10−5 , the seed condition Ωσ < 0.1, and the condition of
mass-dominated spectrum, m > Heq (see [324]), the allowed region in parameter space
turns out to be consistent with a very wide range of axion masses, from the equilibrium
scale m ∼ 10−27 eV up to m ∼ 100 MeV (higher masses are not acceptable, because the
axion would decay into photons before the present epoch, like dilatons, see Eq. (6.33)). We
may thus conclude that there is no fundamental incompatibility between the normalization
imposed by the large-scale anisotropy and an axion mass in the expected range of conven-
tional axion models [566]. The difficulties encountered to match the observed spectrum at
smaller angular scales, discussed in the previous subsection, remains however .


7.5   Massive axions and adiabatic perturbations

In the previous subsections we have analysed a possible scenario in which no axion back-
ground is present in the post-big bang epoch (hσi = 0), and an isocurvature, non-Gaussian
spectrum of temperature anisotropies is eventually induced by the quantum fluctuations of
the (massless or massive) axion field, amplified by inflation. This scenario, whose typical
signatures have been discussed in Subsection 7.3, seems to be strongly disfavoured with
respect to more conventional explanations of the CMB anisotropy offered by the standard
inflationary models.


                                              155
    In this subsection we will consider a possible alternative picture, based on the following
assumptions: i) the constant value of the axion background after the pre-big bang phase
is displaced from the minimum (conventionally defined as σ = 0) of the non-perturbative
potential V (σ) generated in the post-big bang epoch; ii) the axion potential is strong
enough to induce a phase of axion dominance before its decay into radiation. Under these
conditions one finds that the initial isocurvature axion fluctuations, amplified by horizon-
exit during inflation, can be converted into adiabatic (and Gaussian) perturbations of the
spatial curvature, associated to super-horizon (scalar) metric perturbations, which maintain
the same spectrum as the original axion fluctuations until the time of horizon re-entry: these
can then possibly produce the observed CMB anisotropies.
    This possibility, based on a mechanism originally pointed out in [486], has recently been
discussed in detail (and not exclusively within a string cosmology framework) in [241, 459,
487, 65, 502, 488] for the isocurvature fluctuations of a generic scalar field (called “curvaton”
[459]), amplified with a flat spectrum. In the context of the pre-big bang scenario, such a
mechanism has been applied, in particular, to the fluctuations of the KR axion [241], as
suggested in [437]. Here, after a brief description of the conversion of axion fluctuations into
scalar curvature perturbations, we shall discuss the constraints imposed by the CMB data,
and its possible consistency with the small-scale normalization and tilts typical of pre-big
bang models [100].
    The conversion of the axionic isocurvature modes into adiabatic curvature inhomo-
geneities takes place in the post-big-bang phase, where we assume the dilaton φ to be
frozen and the axion σ to be displaced from the minimum of its potential. In the E-frame
the background evolution is then described by the Einstein equations (6.2), with φ simply
replaced by σ, and with c = 0 since the axion is minimally coupled to the metric. For a
conformally flat metric, gµν = a2 ηµν , the time and space components of such equations,
together with the axion evolution equation, can be written (in conformal time and in d = 3)
respectively as

                   6H2 = a2 (ρr + ρσ ) ,             4H′ + 2H2 = −a2 (pr + pσ ) ,         (7.85)
                                     ∂V
                   σ ′′ + 2Hσ ′ + a2    = 0,                                              (7.86)
                                     ∂σ
where H = a′ /a = d(ln a)/dη, ρr = 3pr is the energy density of the radiation fluid, and
                               1 ′2                          1 ′2
                       ρσ =       σ + V (σ),         ρσ =       σ − V (σ).                (7.87)
                              2a2                           2a2
The combination of Eqs. (7.85) and (7.86) leads to the conservation equation for the
radiation fluid, i.e. ρ′r + 4Hρr = 0. In order to perform analytical estimates, we shall
also assume here that the axion potential can be approximated by the quadratic form
V (σ) = m2 σ 2 /2. This is certainly true for σi ≪ 1, but it may be expected to be a realistic
approximation also for the range of values of σi not much larger than 1 (which, as we
shall see, is the appropriate range for a normalization of the spectrum compatible with

                                               156
present data). Actually, for the periodic potential expected for an axion, the value of |σi |
is effectively bounded from above [241].
    Let us now consider the scalar perturbations of the Einstein equations (6.2). Working in
the longitudinal gauge we set δσ = χ, and we use the perturbation variables already defined
in Eq. (6.1) for the metric and for the fluid sources. We impose, in addition, δpr = δρr /3
(adiabatic fluid perturbations), and we introduce the convenient velocity potential vr , such
that δui = a∂i vr .
    The perturbation of the i 6= j component of the Einstein equations then gives ϕ =
ψ = Φ, where Φ is the Bardeen potential, while the perturbation of the (0, i), (0, 0), (i, i)
components, and of the axion (Klein–Gordon) equation, gives a set of four independent
equations for the four scalar variables Φ, χ, δρr , vr . They can be written, respectively, in
the following convenient form:
                                  1       1
                      Φ′ + HΦ = χσ ′ + a2 ρr vr ,                                      (7.88)
                                  4       3
                                              1
                        2           ′
                      ∇ Φ − 3H Φ + HΦ = a2 (ρρ δr + ρσ δσ ) ,                          (7.89)
                                               4                      
                                                1 2 1
                       ′′       ′       ′    2
                      Φ + 3HΦ + 2H + H Φ = a                ρρ δr + δpσ ,              (7.90)
                                                  4       3
                                             ∂2V                  ∂V
                      χ′′ + 2Hχ′ − ∇2 χ + a2 2 χ = 4σ ′ Φ′ − 2a2      Φ,               (7.91)
                                             ∂σ                    ∂σ
where we have defined

                              δr = δρr /ρr ,      δσ = δρσ /ρσ ,
                                                    σ ′ χ′ ∂V
                              δρσ = −Φ (ρσ + pσ ) + 2 +        χ,
                                                     a     ∂σ
                                                    σ ′ χ′ ∂V
                              δpσ = −Φ (ρσ + pσ ) + 2 −        χ.                      (7.92)
                                                     a     ∂σ
The above equations can also be obtained directly from the general system of scalar-
perturbation equations (6.3)–(6.8) (used to discuss dilaton production), for the particular
case in which c = 0, d = 3, β = σ ′ /H, γ = ǫ = 1/3, p = ρ/3, and with φ′ replaced by σ ′ .
We note, for later use, that by eliminating δr from Eqs. (7.89) and (7.90) we are led to
                                               
                                    1        1      1        1 ∂V
            Φ′′ + 4HΦ′ + 2H′ + 2H2 + σ ′2 Φ − ∇2 Φ = σ ′ χ′ − a2  χ,                   (7.93)
                                    6        3      6        3 ∂σ

which, together with Eq. (7.91), provides a closed set of coupled differential equations for
the two variables Φ and χ. By using the above perturbation equations, together with the
background relations (7.85) and (7.86), two useful equations for the evolution of δr and vr
can be finally obtained:
                                    4                      1
                         δr′ = 4Φ′ + ∇2 vr ,          vr′ = δr + Φ.                    (7.94)
                                    3                      4

                                               157
    We now suppose that we start at t = ti , with a radiation-dominated configuration in
which the axion background is initially constant and non-vanishing, σ(ti ) = σi 6= 0, σ ′ (ti ) =
0, providing a subdominant (potential) energy density, ρσ (ti ) = −pσ (ti ) = Vi = m2 σi2 /2
≪ Hi2 ∼ ρr (ti ). We also give initial conditions to our system of perturbation equations
by assuming a given spectrum of isocurvature axion fluctuations, χk (ti ) 6= 0, and a total
absence of perturbations for the metric and the radiation fluid, Φ(ti ) = δr (ti ) = vr (ti ) = 0.
The initial values of the first derivatives of the perturbation variables are then dedermined
by the momentum and Hamiltonian constraints (7.88), (7.89).
    In order to discuss the possible generation of curvature fluctuations we must now specify
the details of the background evolution, taking into account that the axion, initially constant
and subdominant, starts oscillating at a curvature scale Hosc ∼ m (see Eq. (7.86)), and
eventually decays (with gravitational strength) in radiation, at a scale Hd ∼ m3 /MP2 < Hosc .
During the oscillating phase the kinetic and potential energy densities are equal on an
average, so that hpσ i = 0 and hρσ i ∼ a−3 behaves like dust matter. Since ρr ∼ a−4 ,
the radiation energy is always diluted faster, and the axion background tends to become
dominant at a scale Hσ (t) ∼ mσ(t).
     For an efficient conversion of the initial χ and δσ fluctuations into Φ and δr fluctuations
it is further required [241, 459, 487] that the decay occurs after the beginning of the axion-
dominated phase, i.e. Hσ > Hd . Depending upon the relative values of Hσ and Hosc (i.e.
depending upon the value of σi , in Planck units) we have thus different options which will
now be discussed separately.
    (1) If σi < 1, and then Hσ < Hosc , the axion starts oscillating (at a scale H ∼ m) when
the Universe is still radiation-dominated. During the oscillations the averaged potential en-
ergy density decreases like a−3 , i.e. the typical amplitude of the axion background decreases
like a−3/2 , from its initial value σi down to the value σdom at which H = Hσ ∼ mσdom . Dur-
ing this period a ∼ H −1/2 (as the background is radiation-dominated), so that σdom ∼ σi4 ,
and Hσ ∼ mσi4 . Finally, the background remains axion-dominated until the decay scale
Hd ∼ m3 /MP2 . This model of background is thus consistent for Hi > Hosc > Hσ > Hd ,
namely for
                                        1 > σi > (m/MP )1/2 ,                           (7.95)
which leaves a wide allowed range for σi , if we recall the cosmological bounds on the mass
following from the decay of a gravitationally coupled scalar [238, 240] (typically, m > 10
TeV to avoid disturbing standard nucleosynthesis).
    For this class of backgrounds we can now solve the coupled equations (7.91), (7.93),
neglecting the k2 terms in the (Fourier transformed) perturbation equations, since we are
interested in modes well outside the horizon. We find (in cosmic time) that the Bardeen
potential Φ grows like t2 during the initial radiation phase in which the axion is slow rolling,
and like t1/2 during the period of (radiation-dominated) axion oscillations:

              Φk (t) = Aσi χk (ti ) [m(t − ti )]2 ,                   ti < t < tm ,        (7.96)

                                               158
                      = Φk (tm ) + Bσi χk (ti ) [m(t − tm )]1/2 ,                   tm < t < tσ          (7.97)

(A and B are dimensionless numbers of order o1), where tm ∼ Hosc   −1 ∼ m−1 and t ∼ H −1 ∼
                                                                                   σ     σ
(mσi4 )−1 . In the subsequent axion-dominated phase, preceeding the decay, the Bardeen
potential finally oscillates around the value Φk (tσ ), with a resulting overall generation of
curvature perturbations from Φk = 0 to

                                                χk (ti )   χk (ti )
                   hΦk (tσ )i ∼ σi χk (ti ) +            ∼          ,               σi < 1.              (7.98)
                                                  σi        σi

where h. . .i refers to averages over one oscillation period.
    (2) If σi ∼ 1, and then Hσ ∼ Hosc ∼ m, the beginning of the oscillating and axion-
dominated phase are nearly simultaneous, and the Bardeen potential only grows during the
initial radiation-dominated phase, according to eq. (7.96). The final averaged value of the
induced perturbations is now

                   hΦk (tσ )i ∼ σi χk (ti ) ∼ χk (ti ),                             σi ∼ 1.              (7.99)

   (3) Finally, if σi >, and then Hσ > Hosc , the axion starts dominating at the scale
Hσ ∼ mσi , which marks the beginning of a phase of slow-roll inflation, lasting until the
curvature drops below the oscillation scale Hosc ∼ m. Such a model of background is
consistent for Hσ < H1 , namely for
                                            H1
                                               > σi > 1,                                                (7.100)
                                            m
where H1 (fixed around the string scale) corresponds to the beginning of the radiation-
dominated, post-big bang evolution. During the inflationary phase the slow decrease of
the Hubble scale can be approssimated (according to the background equations (7.85) and
(7.86)) as H(t) = αmσi − βm2 (t − tσ ), where α and β are dimensionless coefficients of
order 1. Inflation thus begins at the epoch tσ ∼ 1/mσi , and lasts until the epoch tm ∼
(σi − 1)/m ∼ σi /m. Let us estimate, for this background, the evolution of the Bardeen
potential generated by the primordial axion fluctuations.
    For t < tσ the solution is still given by eq. (7.96), with tm replaced by tσ = 1/mσi . At
the beginning of inflation the averaged amplitude is then Φk (tσ ) ∼ χk (ti )/σi . During slow-
roll inflation, on the other hand, it is known [492] that, for superhorizon modes, Φk ∼ Ḣ/H 2 .
The final amplitude at the beginning of the oscillating phase is then
                               !           !
                          Ḣ          H2
    hΦk (tm )i = Φk (tσ )                           ∼ σi2 Φk (tσ ) ∼ σi χk (ti ),             σi > 1,   (7.101)
                          H2     tm
                                      Ḣ       tσ

and no further amplification is expected in the course of the subsequent cosmological evo-
lution.


                                                      159
    It is amusing to observe that the results (7.98), (7.99), (7.101), which determine the
amplitude of the Bardeen potential in the oscillating (axion-dominated) phase preceding
the axion decay, can be summarized by an equation that holds in all cases, namely
                                                                                
                                                                           c2
                hΦk (td )i = −χk (ti )f (σi ),         f (σi ) = c1 σi +      + c3 ,      (7.102)
                                                                           σi
where c1 , c2 , c3 are numerical coefficients of the order of unity. A preliminary fit [100] based
on numerical and analytical integrations of the perturbation equations gives c1 = 0.129, c2 =
0.183, c3 = 0.019. The function f (σi ) has the interesting feature that it is approximately
invariant under the transformation σi → σi−1 and, as a consequence, has a minimal value
around σi = 1.
   Given Φk , we can easily compute the final value (before axion decay) of the density
constrasts δσ , δr , and of the variable ζ parametrizing in a gauge-invariant way the strength of
curvature perturbations. By using the background equations (7.85) in the axion-dominated
phase, ρσ ≫ ρr , and taking the average of Eq. (7.89), for super-horizon modes, one finds
indeed (averaging being understood) δσ (k) ≃ −2Φk . Similarly, from Eqs. (7.94), and for
super-horizon modes, δr (k) ≃ 4Φk .
   Consider then the variable ζ representing the perturbation of the spatial curvature
on uniform density hypersurfaces, which is conserved (outside the horizon) for adiabatic
perturbations, and which can be written for a general background as [492]:

                                                  HΦ′ + H2 Φ
                                      ζ = −Φ −               .                            (7.103)
                                                   H2 − H′
Outside the horizon we can use −δσ /2 for Φ, the sum of the two background equations
(7.85) for the denominator H2 −H′ , and the Hamiltonian constraint (7.89) for the numerator
HΦ′ + H2 Φ, in order to rewrite ζ in the form
                                     ρσ δσ (k) − (3/4)(ρσ + pσ )δr (k)
                              ζk =                                     .                  (7.104)
                                             4ρr + 3(ρσ + pσ )

In the final phase dominated by an oscillating axion ρr is negligible, the (averaged) axion
pressure is zero so that, using δσ = −2Φ = −δr /2 we finally obtain
                                           5          5
                                       ζk ≃ δσ (k) ≃ − Φk                                 (7.105)
                                           6          3
(as we have also checked by an explicit numerical integration [100]). This result was derived
and presented in [459], using however different notations.
    The generated spectrum of super-horizon curvature perturbations is thus directly de-
termined by the primordial spectrum of isocurvature axion fluctuations χk , according to
Eqs. (7.102) and (7.105). The axion fluctuations, on the other hand, are solutions (with
pre-big bang initial conditions) of the perturbation equation (7.91) in the radiation era
(no additional amplification is expected, for super-horizon modes, in the axion-dominated

                                                 160
phase), computed for negligible curvature perturbations (Φ = 0 = Φ′ ) in the massive,
non-relativistic limit (as we are already in the oscillating regime), and outside the horizon.
    In order to exploit the results of the previous subsection, we can then set χk = ψk /a,
where ψk satisfies Eq. (7.69). The general solution for ψk , correctly normalized to a
relativistic spectrum of quantum fluctuations, has been given in Eq. (7.78) already, taking
also into account the details of the pre-big bang amplification (encoded into the Bogoliubov
coefficient c(k)). Outside the horizon, k|η| ≪ 1, and for non-relativistic modes, k ≪ ma,
                                                                                        √
we take (respectively) the limits −bx2 ≪ 1 and −b ≪ x2 , in which y2 ∼ x = η 2α.
By inserting a generic, primordial power-law spectrum with cut-off scale k1 = H1 a1 , i.e.
c(k) = (k/k1 )(n−5)/2 , and using the identity η/a = η1 /a1 ≃ 1/k1 a1 , we finally obtain the
generated spectrum of curvature perturbations:
                                                               
                                            H1 2 k n−1
      k3 |Φk |2 = f 2 (σi )k3 |χk |2 = f 2 (σi )         ,          k < k1        (7.106)
                                           MP       k1
We have re-inserted the appropriate Planck mass factors, keeping however σi dimension-
less in Planck units, and we have included into k1 possible numerical factors of order 1,
connecting the cut-off scale to the string mass scale
    This result, valid during the axion-dominated phase, has to be transferred to the phase
of standard evolution, by matching the (well known [492]) solution of the Bardeen potential
in the radiation era (subsequent to axion decay) to the solution prior to decay, which is
in general oscillating. The matching of Φ and Φ′ , conventionally performed at the fixed
scale H = Hd , shows that the constant asymptotic value (7.102) of super-horizon modes
is preserved to leading order by the decay process, modulo a random, mass-dependent
correction which typically takes the form [1 + ǫ sin(m/Hd )], where ǫ is a numerical coefficient
of order 1, and m ≫ Hd . Such a random factor, however, is a consequence of the sudden
approximation adopted to describe the decay process, and disappears in a more realistic
treatment in which the evolution equations for ρσ and δρσ are supplemented by the friction
term Γσ ′ /a (with a corresponding antifriction term −Γσ ′ 2 /a2 in the radiation equation).
    In such a way, as we have checked with an numerical integration, the decay process
preserves the value of the Bardeen potential prior to decay, damping the residual oscillations;
ζ itself follows the same behaviour and is finally exactly a constant. When the axion has
completely decayed, and the Universe is again dominated by radiation, we can properly
match the standard evolution of Φ in the radiation phase to the constant asymptotic value
of Eq. (7.102). The expression we obtain for the Bardeen potential, valid until the epoch
of matter–radiation equality, can be written in the form
                                                             
                             cos (kcs η) sin (kcs η)
         Φk (η) = −3Φk (ηd )            −             ,               ηd < η < ηeq ,    (7.107)
                              (kcs η)2     (kcs η)3
              √
where cs = 1/ 3 and Φk (ηd ) is given in Eq. (7.102).
    The above expression for the Bardeen potential provides the initial condition for the evo-
lution of the CMB-temperature fluctuations, and the formation of their oscillatory pattern.

                                                       161
It is important to note that, from the above equation, Φk (ηi ) = constant and Φ′k (ηi ) ≃ 0,
where ηd < ηi < ηeq , and kηi ≪ 1. This implies [100] that the induced temperature
fluctuations (∆T /T )k will oscillate in k just as expected in the case of adiabatic perturba-
tions, producing a peak structure clearly distinguishable (and, at present, observationally
favoured) from that produced by isocurvature fluctuations.
    Let us now discuss the large scale normalization of the induced anisotropies, starting
from the observation that the final amplitude of the super-horizon perturbations (7.106)
seems to be unaffected by the non-relativistic corrections to the axion spectrum. The
dependence on the axion mass appears, however, when computing the amplitude of the
spectrum at the present horizon scale ω0 , in order to impose the corrected normalization to
the quadrupole coefficient C2 , namely [222]
                                                                                                                                   
                                       2          n−1                                    n−3
                                                                                                   Γ(3 − n)Γ               3+n
                                  H1            ω0                                       4    2                             2
       C2 = α2n f 2 (σi )                                      ,           α2n =                                                 ,          (7.108)
                                  MP            ω1                                           9 Γ2           4−n
                                                                                                                      Γ       9−n
                                                                                                             2                 2

where the value of C2 is experimentally determined by COBE according to Eq. (7.53).
   The present value of the cut-off frequency, ω1 (t0 ) = H1 a1 /a0 , depends in fact on the
kinematics as well as on the duration of the axion-dominated phase (and thus on the axion
mass), as follows:
                                                                       !                  
                                   a1               aσ               ad                  aeq
        ω1 (t0 ) = H1                                                                                    ,                              σi < 1, (7.109)
                                   aσ     rad       ad       mat     aeq       rad
                                                                                         a0        mat
                                                                                             !                  
                                   a1                aσ                 aosc                 ad                  aeq
                  = H1                                                                                                          ,       σi > 1. (7.110)
                                   aσ     rad       aosc      inf        ad    mat           aeq       rad
                                                                                                                 a0       mat

Using H0 ≃ 10−6 Heq ≃ 10−61 MP , we find that the COBE normalization imposes
                                            (5−n)                − (n−1)
                      2
                          (n−4)
                                      H1        2            m             3
             c22 α2n σi     3
                                                                                   10−29(n−1) ≃ 10−10 ,                                 σi < 1, (7.111)
                                      MP                     MP
                                                    (5−n)              − (n−1)
                                  (5−n)
                                              H1         2          m                3
             c21 α2n Zσn−1 σi       2
                                                                                             10−29(n−1) ≃ 10−10 , σi > 1, (7.112)
                                              MP                    MP
where Zσ = (aosc /aσ ) > 1 denotes the amplification of the scale factor during the phase of
axion-dominated, slow-roll inflation.
    The condition (7.111) is to be combined with the constraint (7.95), the condition (7.112)
with the constraint (7.100), which are required for the consistency of the corresponding
classes of background evolution. Also, both conditions are to be intersected with the exper-
imentally allowed range of the spectral index. The allowed range of parameters compatible
with all the constraints is rather strongly sensitive to the values of the pre-big bang inflation
scale H1 . In the context of minimal models of pre-big bang inflation we have H1 ∼ Ms , and
a flat spectrum (n = 1, α2n = 1/54π) is inconsistent with the normalization (7.111), (7.112).

                                                                        162
A growing (“blue”) spectrum is instead allowed (see [100] for a detailed discussion). It turns
out, in particular, that there is a wide range of allowed axion masses, but a rather narrow
range of allowed values for σi , especially in the case σi > 1.
    The allowed range of parameters is extended if the inflation scale H1 is lowered, and a
flat (n = 1) spectrum may become possible if H1 ∼     < 10−5 (MP σi /α1 c2 ), for σi < 1, and if
H1 ∼ < 10−5 (MP /σi α1 c1 ), for σi > 1 (see Eqs. (7.111) and (7.112)). A lower value of the
string scale could emerge indeed in a recently proposed framework [607] according to which,
at strong bare-coupling eφ , loop effects renormalize downwards the ratio Ms /MP and allow
Ms to approach the unification scale.
    In addition, a flat spectrum may be allowed even keeping pre-big bang inflation at a
high-curvature scale, provided the relativistic branch of the primordial axion fluctuations
is characterized by a frequency-dependent slope, which is flat enough at low frequency
(to agree with large-scale observations) and much steeper at high frequencies (to match
the string normalization at the end-point of the spectrum). A typical example of such a
spectrum, already introduced in the previous subsection, and illustrated in Fig. 7.4, can be
parametrized by a Bogoliubov coefficient with a break at the intermediate scale ks ,
                                          
                                k n−5+δ
                    |ck |2 =            ,                                  ks < k < k1 ,
                                k1
                                n−5+δ  n−5
                                ks        k
                             =                 ,                                k < ks ,    (7.113)
                                k1        ks
where δ > 0 parametrizes the slope of the break at high frequency. Examples of realistic pre-
big bang backgrounds producing such a spectrum of axion fluctuations have been discussed
in [324]. It is clear that the steeper (and the longer) the high-frequency branch of the
spectrum, the easier the matching of the amplitude to the measured anisotropies (in spite
of possible σi -dependent enhancements).
    Using the generalized input (7.113) for the spectrum of χk , the amplitude of the low-
frequency (k < ks ) Bardeen spectrum (7.106) is to be multiplied by the suppression factor
∆ = (ks /k1 )δ ≪ 1, and the normalization condition at the COBE scale becomes
                                                  
                                  H1 2 ω0 n−1
                       α2n c22                  ≃ C2 ∆−1 ,                        σi < 1,   (7.114)
                                 σi MP   ω1
                                       
                                 σi H1 2 ω0 n−1
                       α2n c21                  ≃ C2 ∆−1 ,                        σi > 1.   (7.115)
                                  MP     ω1
A strictly flat spectrum is now possible, even for α1 H1 = α1 Ms ≃ 10−2 MP , provided
                                                               
                                         ∆ c21 σi2 + c22 σi−2       < 10−6 .
                                                                    ∼                       (7.116)

It thus becomes possible, in this context, to satisfy the stringent limits imposed by the most
recent analyses of the peak and dip structure of the spectrum at small scales [204], which
imply 0.87 ≤ n ≤ 1.06.

                                                         163
    We may thus conclude that, in the context of the pre-big bang scenario, a “curvaton”
model based on the Kalb–Ramond axion is able to produce the adiabatic curvature per-
turbation needed to explain the observed large-scale anisotropies. The simplest, minimal
models of pre-big bang inflation seem to prefer blue spectra. A strictly scale-invariant (or
even slightly red, n < 1) spectrum is not excluded but requires, for normalization pur-
poses, non-minimal models of pre-big bang evolution leading to axion fluctuations with a
sufficiently steep slope at high frequencies.


8    Singularity and “graceful exit”

As already stressed in Section 2, the cosmological solutions of the string effective action,
thanks to their symmetries, are characterized by four branches, which are inter-related by
time-reversal and scale-factor duality transformations. Two branches are of the pre-big
bang type, and evolve towards a singularity, while the other two branches are of the post-
big bang type, and emerge from a singularity. A typical example is illustrated in Fig. 8.1,
where we have plotted the asymptotic, d-dimensional vacuum solutions of the lowest-order
gravidilaton effective action,
                                       √
                        a(t) = (∓t)∓1/ d ,            φ(t) = − ln(∓t),                     (8.1)
                                                                                   ˙ √dH}.
which represent the bisecting lines of the “phase space” spanned by the variables {φ,
The initial conditions of the pre-big bang scenario and the present standard cosmological
configuration are thus disconnected by a singularity localized at the future or past end,
respectively, of the temporal half-line on which they are defined.
    In the case of homogeneous and isotropic metric backgrounds, with or without spatial
curvature, there are “no-go theorems” [126, 395, 396, 233] that exclude the possibility of
a smooth transition from the pre- to the post-big bang branch of the tree-level solutions,
even including a (local) dilaton potential V (φ), and matter sources in the form of perfect
fluids and/or an homogeneous NS-NS two-form. In all these cases the singularity cannot
be removed. In addition, in the absence of sources and of a dilaton potential, it is known
that the singularity also affects anisotropic backgrounds, and can be shown to be generally
present in all homogeneous four-dimensional metrics of Bianchi type I, II, III, V, VI0 and
VIh [312].
    We are thus led to the problem of explaining how the Universe may smoothly evolve from
the string perturbative vacuum, and from an initial accelerated growth of the curvature and
of the string coupling, to a final, decelerated, post-big bang configuration, which is certainly
included in the set of string-cosmology solutions, but is possibly disconnected from the initial
pre-big bang branch by a curvature singularity. This is the so-called “graceful exit” problem.
   The exit from inflation, and a smooth description of the transition from accelerated to
decelerated expansion, is a typical problem of all inflationary models (see for instance [55]).

                                              164
                                              dH

                          expanding                          expanding
                         post-big bang                      pre-big bang




                                              T+t
                                                                     •
                                          T         T

                                              T+t


                          contracting                       contracting
                          post-big bang                     pre-big bang



Figure 8.1: The four branches of the lowest-order string effective action (solid lines), and
a possible self-dual solution (dashed curve), characterized by a(t) = a−1 (−t) and φ(t) =
φ(−t). The symbols T and t represent a T-duality and a time-reversal transformation,
respectively.


In the string cosmology case, however, such a problem is sharpened by the fact that the
transition from the pre- to the post-big bang phase is expected to occur at high curvature
and strong coupling, possibly in the full quantum-gravity regime. This may suggest that a
correct approach to the exit problem is to be developed in a quantum cosmology context, by
exploiting the Wheeler-De Witt equation in the string cosmology minisuperspace, and the
associated O(d, d) symmetry, which helps avoiding operator ordering ambiguities [310, 410].
    In this approach, interesting in itself, the probability of quantum transition from the pre-
to the post-big bang branches of the low-energy solutions can be finite and non-vanishing,
even if the two branches are classically disconnected by a singularity [310, 322]. This
possibility will be presented in detail in Section 9. In this section we shall keep on a
classical (i.e. deterministic) description of the exit, which requires the smoothing out of the
background singularities.
    It should be stressed, in particular, that the phenomenological predictions made in the
previous sections were based on the assumption that the singularity can be regularized,
and that i) a graceful exit does take place; ii) sufficiently large scales are only affected by
it kinematically, i.e. through an overall redshift of all scales. Of course, one would not
only like to know that a graceful exit does take place: one would also like to describe the
transition between the two phases in a quantitative way. Achieving this goal would amount
to nothing less than a full description of what replaces the big bang of standard cosmology
in the pre-big bang scenario. As mentioned in Section 1, this problem of string cosmology
is the analogue, in some sense, of the (still not fully solved) confinement problem of QCD.


                                              165
    The problem of the background regularization is particularly hard because, besides the
smoothing out of the curvature, it also requires the smoothing out of the dilaton kinetic
energy, and a possible damping of the dilaton (i.e. of the string coupling). We may con-
sider, for a simple illustrative example of this point, the lowest-order gravidilaton action,
supplemented by a matter action Sm that describes perfect-fluid sources, with vanishing
dilatonic charge, δSm /δφ = 0:
                          Z                 q                                            
                   1              d+1                −φ                2       1 2
           S = − d−1          d         x       |g| e         R + (∇µ φ) + V − Hµνα + Sm .          (8.2)
                2 λs                                                          12

By assuming an isotropic, spatially flat metric background, with spatial sections of finite
volume, we set
               √                δSm                                                          
                   −g Tµν = 2        ,                           Tµ ν = diag ρ(t), −p(t)δij ,
                                δgµν
                                               
             gµν = diag 1, −a2 (t)δij ,                          φ = φ − d ln a,       φ = φ(t).    (8.3)

For V = 0, Hµνα = 0, the field equations can be written in the form
                                                    2
                                                  φ˙ − dH 2 = eφ ρ,                                 (8.4)
                                                             1
                                                  Ḣ − H φ˙ = eφ p,                                 (8.5)
                                                             2
                                                         2
                                                    ¨  ˙
                                                  2φ − φ − dH 2 = 0                                 (8.6)

where ρ = ρad , p = pad (see Subsection 2.2), and we have used units in which 2λd−1
                                                                                s   = 1.
Their combination gives the conservation equation

                                                    ρ̇ + dHp = 0.                                   (8.7)

The above equations can be satisfied by the following particular exact solution
                              √
                             a d                                                     2 1 − asqrtd
                   H=             √     ,               ρ = kH 2 ,             p = −√        √ ρ,
                        (1 + a d )2                                                   d 1+a d
                         √                                                 √
                 4d   a d                                   √   1+a            d
          φ = ln         √     ,                        φ˙ = dH     √ ,                             (8.8)
                 k (1 − a d )2                                  1−a d

where k is an arbitrary integration constant. The integration of H = H(a) then leads to
the implicit expression for the scale factor,
                                   t    1  √    √ 
                                     = √ a d − a− d + 2 ln a.                                       (8.9)
                                  t0     d

This solution is self-dual, in the sense that a(t) = a−1 (−t), ρ(a) = ρ(a−1 ), φ(a) = φ(a−1 ),
and describes a smooth evolution of the metric from an initial, accelerated phase of growing
curvature and negative pressure, to a final, decelerated phase of decreasing curvature and

                                                          166
positive pressure. The scale factor runs monotonically from zero to infinity, without any
curvature singularity.
    This example cannot be accepted as a successful model of exit, however, because the
dilaton kinetic energy (φ̇2 ) blows up at the transition point (a = 1), together with the effec-
tive string coupling, exp φ. This implies that both α′ and loop corrections to the effective
action become non-negligible at the transition, and that the above solution, obtained in
the low-energy, tree-level approximation, cannot be trusted. In addition, the curvature is
regular in the string frame, but blows up in the Einstein frame defined by

                          e = ae−φ/(d−1) ,
                          a                             dte = dte−φ/(d−1)                (8.10)

                                                                         e = d(ln a
(see for instance Subsection 1.3). Indeed, by setting H = d(ln a)/dt and H            e we
                                                                                  e)/dt,
obtain                                             
                                e             1
                                H= H−             φ̇ eφ/(d−1) ,                      (8.11)
                                            d−1
                                      e may diverge even if both H and φ̇ are regular.
so that, if the dilaton is unbounded, H
    A successful exit thus requires a smooth dilaton evolution, with the kinetic energy and
gs2 = exp φ bounded everywhere.       In addition, the dilaton has to evolve from the initial
regime with φ˙ > 0 to a final regime with φ˙ < 0 (see Fig. 8.1); besides being bounded, at
large positive times, its kinetic energy must thus satisfy the condition

                                             φ̇ < dH.                                    (8.12)

    This is not sufficient, however, for a complete exit. An even stronger condition is imposed
by requiring that the final, post-big bang configuration may describe (even in the E-frame)
a phase of decelerated expansion, after the contraction representing pre-big bang inflation
(after all, the String and Einstein frames are doomed to coincide, eventually, in the limit
of dilaton stabilization). This implies H   e > 0 at large positive times or, according to Eq.
(8.11),
                                          φ̇ < (d − 1)H.                                  (8.13)
The above constraints can be translated into energy conditions, to be satisfied by the stress
tensor of the effective sources driving the exit transition [121, 122].
    In spite of such constraints, there are simple examples of regular backgrounds imple-
menting a successful exit by means of appropriate sources, as we shall see in Subsection
8.1. The simplest examples, however, are not very realistic. The most realistic physical
mechanism of exit, in the perturbative regime, is probably based on the backreaction of
the quantum fluctuations, which leads, however, to including loops (and possibly higher
derivative) corrections in the effective action, as we shall discuss in Subsections 8.2 and 8.3.
Such corrections suggest possible lines along which a quantitative description of the exit
might eventually emerge.


                                               167
    The loop corrections, however, become important in the strong coupling regime, i.e. in
the realm of the still largely unknown M-theory [626, 376], as will be discussed in Subsection
8.5. It is thus possible that, in spite of the existing encouraging results, new techniques
and/or a deeper understanding of string theory in its non-perturbative regimes need be
developed (see [110] for a recent attempt), before a fully satisfactory description of the
transition from pre- to post-big bang can be hoped for.
    In the next subsection we will start presenting a few simple examples of smooth solutions,
without curvature singularities, obtained in the context of the low-energy string effective
action.


8.1   Smoothing out the singularity at low energy

It is well known, from the singularity theorems of general relativity (see for instance [372,
371, 615]), that a smooth and complete geometrical background, with all the curvature
invariants bounded everywhere, is only allowed if the sources of the gravitational field
satisfy appropriate energy conditions.
    In the context of the string cosmology equations, the situation is even more constrained,
because also the string coupling gs , parametrized by the dilaton, has to be bounded (and
possibly smaller than 1) for a consistent and appropriate use of the string effective action
(and of the perturbative expansion). In addition, if the curvature and the dilaton kinetic
energy are regular in the S-frame, but the dilaton is free to grow boundlessly, then diver-
gences may appear in the E-frame according to Eq. (8.11). This may occur, for instance,
if the regularization of the curvature in the S-frame leads to a phase of constant H and φ̇,
as in the context of the higher-order effective action [294, 307], which will be discussed in
Subsection 8.3. The importance of a frame-independent regularization is stressed by the
fact that some particles, such as the gravitons, follow the E-frame geodesics [399].
    In spite of such difficulties, examples of smooth, self-dual solutions with no curvature
singularities have been obtained, even in the context of the lowest-order string effective
action, and of homogeneous and isotropic backgrounds, by introducing however ad hoc a
negative and non-local dilaton potential [477, 319, 310], V (φ) < 0. Such
                                                                        R a potential, which
                                                                            d √ 
only makes sense for manifolds with spatial sections of finite volume,     d x −g          <
                                                                                     t=const
∞ (for instance, a torus), is non-local because φ, to be a generally covariant scalar, must
contain the integral of the whole spatial volume (see Subsection 1.4).
   Consider, as an example, the action (8.2), with a dilaton potential V (φ). The field
equations, for an isotropic and spatially flat metric, become (2λd−1
                                                                 s   = 1)
                                   2
                                 φ˙ − dH 2 − V = ρeφ ,                                  (8.14)
                                            1
                                 Ḣ − H φ˙ = peφ ,                                      (8.15)
                                            2


                                             168
                                                     2

                                                   1.5
                                              •
                                              φ
                                                     1

                                                   0.5
                                           H
                                                                                   t
                          -10        -5                              5        10
                                              HE




Figure 8.2: Plot of the solution (8.18) with V0 = 1, k = 1, d = 3. The bold curves show
the time evolution of the curvature and of the dilaton kinetic energy in the S-frame. The
thin dashed curve shows the Hubble parameter HE = H    e of the E-frame.


                                   2
                                       ¨ + dH 2 + ∂V − V = 0,
                                 φ˙ − 2φ                                                               (8.16)
                                                  ∂φ

and the conservation equation (8.7) is still valid. In the vacuum case ρ = p = 0, the full set
of equations can be integrated exactly [477], and one finds that non-singular solutions are
in general allowed. If we consider, for instance, the potential [310]

                                           V (φ) = −V0 e4φ ,                                           (8.17)

the above equations can be exactly satisfied by the particular solution
                                                         √
                                             !1/2 1/       d                                  
                       k2 t          k 4 t2                                   1        V0
            a = a0  √        + 1+                              ,       φ=               + k 2 t2 ,   (8.18)
                         V0           V0                                      2        k2

where k and a0 are integration constants.
    This is a regular self-dual solution, a(t)/a0 = a0 /a(−t), characterized by a bounded,
“bell-like” shape not only of H but also of the dilaton kinetic energy (unlike the example
given in Eq. (8.8)). For t → +∞ the solution satisfies the conditions (8.12), (8.13) required
for a successful exit [121, 122] and, together with its time-reversed partner, it describes
indeed a perfect “8-shaped” curve in the plane of Fig. 8.1. Such a solution smoothly
interpolates between the asymptotic branches    (8.1) of the vacuum solutions, i.e. from the
                                          √         √
superinflationary expansion a ∼ (−t)−1/ d , φ = d ln √     a at t → −∞, to the final state of
                                                                     √
decelerated expansion and decreasing curvature a ∼ t d , φ = − d ln a at t → +∞ (see
                                                        1/

Figs. 8.2 and 8.3).
    It is important to note that in this solution the dilaton is monotonically growing (indeed,
                      √
for t → +∞, φ ∼ ( d − 1) ln t), but the curvature is regular even in the E-frame, where
He smoothly evolves from the pre-big bang accelerated contraction at H     e < 0, to a phase of


                                                     169
                                                                    √
decelerated expansion at H  e > 0. For t → +∞, in fact, H e ∼ t( d−3)/2 , so that the E-frame
curvature is bounded for all d ≤ 9. The fact that the dilaton keeps growing, however, is
not consistent (asymptotically) with the perturbative approach, and with the use of the
lowest-order string effective action. In addition, the curvature may blow up in some other
frame, different from the String and Einstein ones.
    A more satisfactory example of transition, in which the dilaton becomes asymptotically
frozen in the radiation-dominated regime, can be implemented by using another form of
non-local dilaton potential [319],
                                     V (φ) = −V0 e2φ .                             (8.19)
In that case Eqs. (8.14)–(8.16) can be integrated exactly, for a wide class of (possibly
time-dependent) equations of state. Let us report in some detail the integration procedure
already outlined in Subsection 2.3, which is also useful for further applications.
   We start by defining a new (dimensionless) time coordinate x, such that

                                          2dx = Lρdt                                    (8.20)

(L is a constant parameter with dimensions of a length). The combination of Eqs. (8.14),
(8.16), using the relation 2V = ∂V /∂φ, gives
                                         ′
                                  ρ e−φ        L2 = 2(x + x0 ),                         (8.21)

where a prime denotes the differentiation with respect to x, and x0 is an integration constant.
By assuming a time-dependent equation of state, defined by the function Γ(x) such that

                                        Γ′ (x) = p/ρ,                                   (8.22)

Eq. (8.15) can be rewritten as
                                                
                                  L2 ρ a′ /a e−φ = 2Γ(x).                               (8.23)

The matter-conservation equation (8.7), on the other hand, gives
                                                          ′
                                   L2 ρ ′ e−φ = −d Γ2           .                       (8.24)

By summing Eqs. (8.21), (8.24), and integrating, we are led to defininig the function D(x)
such that
                     L2 ρ e−φ = (x + x0 )2 − dΓ2 (x) + β ≡ D(x)                      (8.25)
(β is an integration constant), and our system of equations for a and φ can be reduced to
quadratures:
                          a′     Γ(x)              ′     x + x0
                             =2       ,          φ = −2          .                 (8.26)
                          a      D(x)                     D(x)



                                                170
   We have to satisfy, finally, Eq. (8.14), which determines the constant β through the
condition
                              (x + x0 )2 dΓ2      V      1
                                   2
                                        − 2 − 2 2 = .                             (8.27)
                                 D         D     L ρ    D
There are two possibilities. The first one is trivial: V = 0 and β = 0. The second solution,
valid for the potential (8.19), is
                                       β = V0 L2 > 0.                                 (8.28)
In such a case the integration of Eqs. (8.26) may provide regular solutions, with bounded
curvature, kinetic terms and dilaton, describing a smooth evolution from the pre- to the
post-big bang regime [319].
    The simplest examples of regular solutions are obtained in the case of perfect fluids,
with equation of state p/ρ = γ = const. From Eq. (8.22) one finds indeed Γ(x) = γ(x + x1 ),
where x1 is an integration constant and, if β = V0 L2 > 0, it is always possible to choose
x0 , x1 in such a way that D(x) has no zeros, and the solution is regular. See [319], in
particular, for the radiation case with γ = 1/d. But, in general, we may also describe a
smooth evolution, which ends up with radiation, starting from its dual equation of state,
γ = −1/d, corresponding to a gas of stretched strings (typical example of a pre-big bang
phase dominated by string sources, see Section 2). If we take, for instance [319],
                     p            x                                         1 2
                       (x) =                ,                      Γ(x) =     (x + x21 )1/2 ,                (8.29)
                     ρ       d(x + x21 )1/2
                                2                                           d

and we choose x0 = 0, x21 = L2 V0 , the integration of Eqs. (8.26) gives in fact
                                                                                "                 # 2d
                     h                        i 2                                     x            d−1
                             2
             a = a0 x + (x       + x21 )1/2    d−1
                                                     ,         φ
                                                               e    = ad0 eφ0   1+ 2                     ,   (8.30)
                                                                                  (x + x21 )1/2
                     d − 1 2φ0 2         d+1                          d − 1 2φ0            − 3d+1
             ρeφ =       2
                           e (x + x21 )− d−1 ,             peφ =          2
                                                                            e x (x2 + x21 ) 2(d−1) .         (8.31)
                      dL                                               dL

    This solution is self-dual, a(t)/a0 = a0 /a(−t), and describes a model that is always exap-
nding, H > 0. The Universe, starting at t → −∞ from the flat space (H → 0) and weak
coupling (eφ → 0) regime, evolves through a superinflationary phase (a ∼ (−t)−2/(d+1) )
dominated by unstable string matter (p = −ρ/d), towards the standard radiation-dominated
phase (a ∼ t2/(d+1) , p = ρ/d), with frozen dilaton (exp φ ∼ const). The curvature parame-
ters H, Ḣ, and the coupling exp φ, are everywhere bounded (see Fig. 8.3).
    It should be noted that with different, more general choices of x0 and x1 , the solution
contains, in general, an intermediate stage of contraction before the final radiation phase
[29], but even in that case the curvature and the dilaton keep bounded. The above so-
lution can also be generalized to anisotropic configurations, describing graceful exit from
inflation and, simultaneously, dynamical dimensional reduction [319]. In that case, besides
the d expanding dimensions, there are also n shrinking internal dimensions that evolve


                                                         171
           1                                                   1.75                   3 H
                                        gS
         0.8                                                   1.5
         0.6                                                   1.25
         0.4                                                      1
                 H
                        φ                                      0.75
         0.2           ρe
                                                               0.5
           0                                         t
                                φ                              0.25                               •
                             pe
        -0.2                                                                                       φ-3H
            -6   -4   -2    0       2        4   6                -1.5   -1    -0.5   0     0.5   1    1.5




Figure 8.3: Plot of the solution (8.30), (8.31) with φ0 = 0, L = 1, x1 = 1, d = 3, a0 = e−2/3 .
The left panel shows the evolution of the curvature scale, of the coupling, of the energy
density and pressure. The right panel shows the trajectory of the above solution (bold
curve) in the plane parametrized by the shifted dilaton and by the Hubble parameter. The
dashed lines represent the asymptotic vacuum solution (8.1). We have also reported the
trajectory of the solution (8.18) (thin curve).

from accelerated contraction (driven by an internal positive pressure) to a final decelerated
contraction (driven by negative pressure).
    Without non-local potential and matter sources, smooth solutions can be obtained by
relaxing the isotropy and/or homogeneity assumptions. There are indeed particular ex-
amples, in the context of the lowest-order string effective action, in which the curvature
singularities can be regularized by performing an appropriate O(d, d) transformation, which
introduces, however, a non-trivial anisotropic axion background (it is tempting to speculate
that this softening of singularities, due to a non-trivial Bij field, could be related to recent
developments in the field of non-commutative geometry [219], also induced by a Bij field).
    The simplest example [308] is the d = 2 boost of the trivially flat, Milne-type exact
solution of the gravidilaton action (8.2) (with V = 0 = H);
                      ds2 = dt2 − (bt)2 dx2 − dy 2 − (dzi )2 ,                φ = const,                     (8.32)
or of its (singular) scale-factor duality partner:
                  ds2 = dt2 − (bt)−2 dx2 − dy 2 − (dzi )2 ,               φ = −2 ln |bt|,                    (8.33)
(zi are “inert” coordinates spanning a n-dimensional Euclidean space). Consider in fact the
O(2, 2) transformation, in the (x, y) plane, generated by the one-parameter matrix Λ(γ)
such that
                                                        −1                   
                     f      T                             G        −G−1 B
               M → M = Λ MΛ ,                     M=                            ,
                                                         BG−1 G − BG−1 B
                                                 
                        1+c      s     c − 1 −s
                       −s     1 − c −s 1 + c 
                                                 
               Λ(γ) =                            ,    c = coshγ, s = sinhγ         (8.34)
                      c − 1     s     1 + c −s 
                          s    1+c       s   1−c

                                                         172
(here G and B are the 2 × 2, (x, y) part of the metric and of the antisymmetric tensor).
We obtain a new class of exact solutions of the string effective action, with non-trivial Bµν ,
represented by [308]
                                     (c∓1)+(c±1)b2 t2          s(1+b2 t2 )   !
                           e         (c±1)+(c∓1)b2 t2       (c±1)+(c∓1)b2 t2
                           G(γ) =       s(1+b2 t2 )
                                                                                 ,
                                     (c±1)+(c∓1)b2 t2              1
                                                               −s(1+b2 t2 )  !
                                              0             (c±1)+(c∓1)b2 t2
                           e
                           B(γ) =                                                ,
                                         s(1+b2 t2 )
                                      (c±1)+(c∓1)b   2 t2          0
                                    h                          i
                           φe = − ln (c ± 1) + (c ∓ 1)b2 t2 ,                                (8.35)

where the upper and lower signs refer, respectively, to the boost of the solution (8.32) and
(8.33).
    For such solutions, all the curvature invariants are bounded [308], as well as the dilaton
coupling exp φ, so that the solutions are regular in all frames. They describe a smooth
evolution from (anisotropic) contraction to expansion, or vice versa, according to the be-
haviour of the original metric (the Milne-type solution or its dual). In any case, the boosted
backgrounds (8.35) evolve from growing to decreasing curvature, and from growing to de-
creasing dilaton, as appropriate to a transition from pre- to post-big bang configurations.
The new solutions are highly anisotropic, but the associated shear tensor rapidly decays far
from the high-curvature regime [308]. Taking into account the backreaction of the produced
radiation it is also possible to obtain a more realistic scenario, in which the background is
eventually led to a phase of radiation-dominated, isotropic expansion, at constant dilaton
[284].
   More complicated, inhomogeneous examples of (non-trivial) regular backgrounds at low
energy are provided by the “boosted” version of the Nappi–Witten solution [497]. We start
with the following (singular) exact solution of the action (8.2) with V = 0 = Hµνα ,

    ds2 = dt2 − dx2 − tan−2 t dy 2 − tan2 x dz 2 ,          φ = − ln(sin 2t) − ln(sin 2x),   (8.36)

representing the direct product of a two-dimensional cosmological metric in the (t, y) plane
and a two-dimensional Euclidean black hole in the (x, z) plane. Since the metric is inde-
pendent of y and z we can apply to it any O(2, 2) transformation in the (y, z) plane, to
obtain new classes of inequivalent solutions. In particular, the transformation generated by
the 4 × 4 O(2, 2) matrix
                                                       
                              δ   0           0      δ
                            0    1          −1      0                   1 − sin α
                                                      
                 ΛNW (α) =       −1                   ,          δ2 =             ,        (8.37)
                            0  δ            δ−1     0                   1 + sin α
                             −1   0           0      1

generates the one-parameter family of inhomogeneous (and singular) Nappi–Witten cos-
mologies [497].

                                                  173
    As in the previous example, the singularities of the solution (8.36) can be removed by
introducing an additional (originally flat) spatial dimension, parametrized by the coordinate
w. The model then acquires a larger symmetry, isomorphic to O(3, 3), in the subspace
(y, z, w). Performing two successive “boost” transformations (with the same parameter γ
as in Eq. (8.34)) in the (z, w) plane and in the (y, w) plane, one can obtain a new class
of inhomogeneous exact solutions completely free from curvature and dilaton singularities
(see [309] for an explicit computation). As an example we report here the curvature scalar
and the coupling of the boosted solutions [309]:
                     h                             i−1 h                                     i−1
             e
            eφ = (c + 1) sin2 t + (c − 1) cos2 t           (c + 1) cos2 x + (c − 1) sin2 x         ,

            e=     16 cos2 t sin2 t − 20s2                16 cos2 x sin2 x − 20s2
            R                                   2 −                                  2 .            (8.38)
                (c + 1) sin2 t + (c − 1) cos2 t        (c + 1) cos2 x + (c − 1) sin2 x

The curvature and the dilaton are bounded, but the background is too inhomogeneous to
provide a realistic description of our present Universe. Such solutions could be relevant,
however, to descrive the Universe near the transition regime, before the beginning of the
standard radiation era.
    The same comment applies to another class of regular inhomogeneous solutions of the
lowest-order action (8.2), which is obtained even in the absence of torsion (Bµν = 0) and
dilaton potential, and which can be parametrized in diagonal form as [330]
                                                    
      ds2 = A dt2 − dx2 − B Cdy 2 + C −1 dz 2 ,                  φ = α Gd (µt) + const,                (8.39)

where:
                                                                       
                                      αGd (µt)         2+β       µx 2β(β+1)
                        A(x, t) = e         (cosh µt)      cosh             ,
                                                                  2
                        B(x, t) = eαGd (µt) (cosh µt) (sinh µx) ,
                                                                    
                                             1+β        µx          µx 1+2β
                        C(x, t) = (cosh µt)        sinh       cosh            .           (8.40)
                                                         2           2
                       √
Here µ, α and β = α2 + 4 are constant parameters, and Gd (µt) = tan−1 (sinh µt) is
the so-called “Gudermannian amplitude”. As shown in [330, 332], there are particular
values of α for which the curvature invariants are bounded, the solutions are geodesically
complete and describe a phase of growing dilaton coupling, evolving from a minimum up
to a maximal value. We note that there is also another family of inhomogeneous solutions
of the gravidilaton equations in which all curvature invariants are bounded [519], which
is parametrized by a non-diagonal metric and reduces, in the E-frame, to known regular
solutions of the Einstein equations with stiff sources [472]. In that case, however, the dilaton
grows linearly and boundlessly.
    We may thus conclude that, as in general relativity [562, 472], if the metric background is
allowed to be inhomogeneous there is no need of a non-local potential and/or antisymmetric

                                                 174
tensor densities to obtain regular cosmological solutions, even in the contex of the lowest
order gravidilaton action.
    To stress the difficulty in obtaining smooth solutions in the homogeneous and isotropic
case, on the contrary, we will conclude this subsection with a simple example, based on a
Bianchi-I-type metric, and barotropic (but anisotropic) fluid sources with constant dilaton
charge per unit mass:
                                                                                       
                 gµν = diag 1, −a2i (t)δij ,             Tµ ν = diag ρ(t), −pi (t)δij ,
                                                         √            δSm
                 p i = γi ρ ,                                −gσ =        = γ0 ρ ,            (8.41)
                                                                       δφ

where Sm is the matter action of Eq. (8.2), and γi , γ0 are d + 1 constant parameters
specifying the “equation of state” of the fluid sources. The corresponding cosmological
equations can be written in the form
                                       2  X
                                     φ˙ −   Hi2 = ρeφ ,                                       (8.42)
                                             i
                                                  1
                                     Ḣi − Hi φ˙ = ρ(γi + γ0 )eφ ,                            (8.43)
                                                  2
                                            ¨ + X H 2 = γ ρeφ .
                                     ˙φ2 − 2φ                                                 (8.44)
                                                         i     0
                                                   i

Following the procedure already applied to the case of the non-local potential (8.19), the
above equations can be integrated exactly in terms of the time coordinate (8.20), and we
obtain [211]

                          ′               (x + x0 )
                       φ = −2(1 + γ0 )               ,                 (1 + γ0 ) 6= 0,        (8.45)
                                            D(x)
                       a′i               (x + xi )
                           = 2(γi + γ0 )           ,                  (γi + γ0 ) 6= 0,        (8.46)
                       ai                 D(x)

where                                                         X
               L2 ρe−φ = D(x) ≡ (1 + γ0 )2 (x + x0 )2 −            (γi + γ0 )2 (x + xi )2 ,   (8.47)
                                                               i

and xi , x0 are integration constants. In the case 1 + γ0 = 0 and/or γi + γ0 = 0, a slightly
different definition of the quadratic form D(x) is obtained, as well as a different expression
       ′
for φ and a′i , but in that case no smooth solution with bounded curvature and energy
density is allowed, for any value of γi , γo , xi , x0 . We will thus concentrate on Eqs. (8.45)–
(8.47) (see [211] for a discussion of the other possibilities).
     By setting D(x) = αx2 +bx+c it can easily be checked that if the background is isotropic
(i.e. γi and xi have the same values along all the d spatial directions), then the discriminant
of D(x) is always non-negative, i.e. ∆ = b2 − 4αc ≥ 0, so that D(x) necessarily has zeros on
the real axis, correponding to singularities both in the curvature and in the dilaton kinetic


                                                 175
energy. Such singularities can be avoided, however, for anisotropic backgrounds, provided
we accept a model of sources with negative energy density, ρ < 0.
    Consider for instance a model of background in which the spatial geometry is factorizable
as the direct product of two conformally flat manifolds with d and n dimensions, respectively,
so that we can set:

                 ai = a1 ,             γi = γ1 ,     xi = x1 ,          i = 1, . . . d,
                 ai = a2 ,             γi = γ2 ,     xi = x2 ,          i = d + 1, . . . d + n,       (8.48)

and choose a convenient set of integration constants, such that the linear term in the
quadratic form (8.47) disappears. For instance:

                                                              n(γ2 + γ0 )2
                               x0 = 0,             x1 = −x2                .                          (8.49)
                                                              d(γ1 + γ0 )2

It turns out that c < 0, and that the absence of zeros in D(x) can be avoided, ∆ = −4αc < 0,
provided
                        α = (1 + γ0 )2 − d(γ1 + γ0 )2 − n(γ2 + γ0 )2 < 0.             (8.50)

    With the above assumptions, the integration of Eqs. (8.45), (8.46) leads to the final
solution
                                                                                        
                              γi +γ0                     2xi (γi + γ0 )       αx
     ai = ai0 Ei (x) |D(x)|      α     ,    Ei (x) = exp      √         tan−1 √                ,   i = 1, 2,
                                                                αc              αc
     eφ = eφ0 ad10 an20 E1d (x)E2n (x) |D(x)|−[(1+γ0 )−d(γ1 +γ0 )−n(γ2 +γ0 )]/α ,
           eφ0                                    1−[(1+γ0 )+d(γ1 +γ0 )+n(γ2 +γ0 )]/α
     ρ = − 2 a−d       −n −d         −n
                 10 a20 E1 (x)E2 (x) |D(x)|                                           ,               (8.51)
           L
where ai0 , φ0 are integration constants. As shown in [211], there is a region of non-zero
extension in the space of the parameters γi , γ0 where the condition (8.50) is satisfied, to-
gether with the other conditions needed to secure that the curvature, the dilaton kinetic
energy, the effective string coupling, the energy density are everywhere bounded, that the
density goes asymptotically to zero at large times, and that the solution describes in its
final configuration d expanding and n contracting dimensions (as appropriate to a smooth
transition from a higher-dimensional pre-big bang configuration to a post-big bang regime
of dynamical dimensional reduction).
    The condition (8.50) implies, however, that D(x) < 0 everywhere, and thus ρ < 0,
according to Eq. (8.47) (the result D < 0 in the absence of zeros is independent from the
particular choice b = 0). Such a result is not surprising, after all, because also the regular
solutions obtained in the case of negative non-local potentials correspond to a negative
energy density. See also [235] for another class of smooth, self-dual solutions of the low-
energy effective action in which the energy density of the matter sources becomes negative,
near the transition, because of an “exotic” equation of state.

                                                    176
    In the above example the negative energy density goes to zero, asymptotically, far from
the transition regime, and can thus be interpreted as the backreaction of the quantum
fluctuations outside the horizon [211]. During the initial pre-big bang phase of growing
curvature and shrinking horizons, in fact, the quantum fluctuations are stretched outside the
horizon, and in such regime they may be characterized by a negative effective gravitational
energy density [494, 495], which may favour the transition to the post-big bang branch of
the classical solution [344]. Such a negative backreaction is eventually damped to zero when
the curvature starts decreasing, the horizon blows up again, and all the fluctuations re-enter
inside the horizon and in the regime of positive energy density.
    The inclusion of the backreaction of the quantum fluctuation, on the other hand, is also
a semiclassical way of taking into account the contribution of the quantum loop corrections
to the effective action. Thus, the examples of graceful exit reported in this subsection, based
on effective sources (fluid or non-local potential) with ρ < 0, which become dominant just
around the epoch of transition, suggest the possible importance of the quantum backreaction
–and of the loop corrections to the string effective action– for a successful mechanism of
curvature and dilaton regularization. This possibility will be illustrated in Subsection 8.3,
after a preliminary discussion of the effects of the higher-curvature corrections, which will
be presented in the next subsection.


8.2   Growth of the curvature and α′ corrections

The effective action of string theory is characterized by two perturbative expansions: the
higher-genus expansion in the world-sheet topology, and the order-by-order condition of
vanishing conformal anomaly, also called α′ expansion [346]. The first one is equivalent
to the quantum, field-theoretical loop expansion in powers of the coupling; the second one
is equivalent to a higher-curvature expansion in powers of the field gradients (in units of
λs = (2πα′ )−1/2 ). The second one is typical of strings, and disappears in the point-like limit
λs → 0.
    These two expansions are indepedent in principle; it is possible, depending on the initial
conditions, that the Universe evolving from the string perturbative vacuum reaches the
strong-coupling regime when the curvature is still small, and the α′ corrections are negligible.
Alternatively, the Universe can reach the regime of high curvatures (in string units) when
the coupling is small: in that case, only the α′ corrections are to be added to the tree-level
action.
    What is important, in the context of the exit problem, is that such higher-curvature
corrections may help the transition to the post-big bang regime, by damping the inflationary
growth of the dilaton and of the curvature, and driving the cosmological background to a
high-curvature “string phase” of constant curvature and linearly evolving dilaton [307], H =
const, φ̇ = const.


                                              177
    Remarkably, such a regularized background can be a solution of the tree-level effective
action to all orders in α′ . Indeed, as shown in [307], for a Bianchi-I-type configuration with
ai = exp(Hi t), φ = ct, with constant c and Hi , the string cosmology equations reduce (to all
orders in α′ ) to a system of d + 1 algebraic equations for the d + 1 unknowns c, Hi . String-
phase solutions thus generally exist, provided the algebraic system admits (non-trivial) real
solutions.
    In addition, the (all orders) equations resemble those of a renormalization group flow
(in cosmic time), with the string-phase solution like a “fixed point” of the renormalization
equations. It can thus be shown [307] that a string phase solution with φ˙ < 0 can play
the role of late-time attractor for an isotropic Universe evolving from pre-big bang initial
conditions, provided no other fixed point, or singularity, separates the string phase from
the string perturbative vacuum (i.e. from the trivial fixed point with H = 0 = φ̇).
    A simple example of this possibility, first presented in [307], is based on the following
S-frame effective action, truncated to first order in α′ :
                                 Z          q                                                                
                     1               d+1            −φ                  kα′  2
                                                                         2
                                                                                         
              S = − d−1              d     x |g|e            R + (∇φ) −      RGB − (∇φ)4                          (8.52)
                   2λs                                                   4

(k is a number of order 1 depending on the particular string model adopted). Note that
we have chosen a convenient field redefinition (preserving the conformal invariance of the
σ-model action [482]) that eliminates higher than second derivatives from the equations of
motion, but at the price of introducing dilaton-dependent α′ corrections.
   For a spatially flat anisotropic background, with d external and n internal dimensions,

                       g00 = N 2 (t),           gij = −δij eβ(t) ,           gab = −δab eγ(t) ,                   (8.53)

the action becomes
          Z                  
                 dβ+nγ−φ         1  2                                                              
 S=           dte                   −φ̇ − d(d − 1)β̇ 2 − n(n − 1)γ̇ 2 − 2dnβ̇ γ̇ + 2dβ̇ φ̇ + 2nγ̇ φ̇ +
                                 N
          kα′  4
                     c1 β̇ + c2 γ̇ 4 + c3 φ̇β̇ 3 + c4 φ̇γ̇ 3 + c5 φ̇β̇ γ̇ 2 + c6 φ̇β̇ 2 γ̇ + c7 β̇ 2 γ̇ 2 +
          4N 3                         i
          c8 β̇ γ̇ 3 + c9 β̇ 3 γ̇ − φ̇4 ,                                                                         (8.54)

where c1 , . . . , c9 are dimensionless numerical coefficients depending on d and n (see [307]).
By varying the action with respect to φ and N , and setting n = 0, φ̇ = x = const, β̇ = y =
const (in the N = 1 gauge ), we are led to the algebraic equations for an isotropic fixed
point:

                                               kα′  4                   
                       x2 + d(d − 1)y 2 − 2dxy −      c1 y + c3 xy 3 − x4 −
                                                4
                                                             
                                            kα′  3         3
                       (dy − x) −2x + 2dy +       c3 y − 4x      = 0,
                                             4


                                                             178
                     1.4                                                                 3H
                                     •                                               1
                     1.2             φ
                       1                                                        0.5
                                                                                                    •
                     0.8                                                                             φ-3H
                     0.6                                         -1 -0.75-0.5-0.25        0.25 0.5 0.75 1
                     0.4             H
                                                                               -0.5
                     0.2
                                                       t                         -1
        -40    -20              20       40       60




Figure 8.4: Numerical integration of the isotropic equations for the action (8.54) (solid
curves) with d = 3, n = 0, and with initial conditions on the low-energy pre-big bang
branch (dashed curves). The left panel shows the time evolution of φ̇ and H = β̇ for an
expanding background. The right panel shows the evolution connecting the vacuum to the
non-trivial fixed point, for an expanding solution and its time-reversed counterpart.

                                              3                        
                     x2 + d(d − 1)y 2 − 2dxy − kα′ c1 y 4 + c3 xy 3 − x4 = 0,
                                              4
                            d                               4
                     c1 = − (d − 1)(d − 2)(d − 3),   c3 = d(d − 1)(d − 2),                                  (8.55)
                            3                               3
which have real solutions for any d from 1 to 9. For instance (in units kα′ = 1)

                           d = 3,             φ̇ = ±1.40...,           β̇ = ±0.616...,                      (8.56)

where the same sign has to be taken for φ̇ and β̇. Note that, with the addition of a non-zero
Bµν background, anisotropic fixed-point configurations can also be obtained, as shown in
[257].
    A numerical integration of the isotropic cosmological equations, starting from pre-big
bang initial conditions (H > 0, φ˙ > 0), shows that the background, when the α′ corrections
become important, deviates from the tracks of the low-energy, singular solutions, and is
eventually attracted to the isotropic fixed point (8.55), as illustrated in Fig. 8.4. In this
sense, the curvature singularity is regularized by the α′ corrections, at least in the S-frame
(but not in the E-frame, as the linear growth of the dilaton is unbounded). Note that a
similar curvature regularization is also effective for a static, spherically symmetric solution of
the action (8.52) [131]. It should be mentioned that a similar behaviour can also be obtained
at low energy (without α′ corrections), including the contribution of a supersymmetric
gravitino–dilatino condensate, which is able to damp the acceleration of the background
and to regularize the S-frame curvature, as shown in [258].
   It may be noted, finally, that a solution with H = const, φ̇ = const is in general allowed in
many higher-derivative models of gravity. Such a fixed point of the cosmological equations,
however, is in general disconnected from the trivial fixed point H = 0 = φ̇ (the perturbative
vacuum, in this case) by a singularity, or by an unphysical region in which the curvature

                                                           179
becomes imaginary. For the action (8.52), on the contrary, the constant fixed point is a late-
time attractor for all isotropic backgrounds emerging from the string perturbative vacuum,
and even for some anisotropic backgrounds, provided sign{γ̇}= sign{β̇} (the attraction
basin of anisotropic configurations covers regions of small but finite size in the space of
initial conditions [307]).
    This attraction property, unfortunately, is not invariant under field redefinitions, as long
as the action is truncated at a given finite order in α′ . Also, and most important, the growth
of the curvature is stopped, but the transition is not completely performed. Indeed, the
final fixed point is in the post-big bang regime φ˙ < 0, as illustrated in Fig. 8.4, but the
transition cannot proceed further towards lower curvatures to complete the transition.
    The reason for such an incompleteness, which is manifest as an asymmetry in the plane
 ˙  √
{φ, 3H} of Fig. 8.4, is that the action (8.52) is invariant under time reflections, but is not
duality-invariant. As a consequence, the regularization concerns the expanding pre-big bang
branch of the lowest-order solution, and its time-symmetric counterpart, the contracting
post-big bang branch. The expanding post-big bang branch remains, however, singular, and
thus cannot be smoothly connected to the regularized pre-big bang branch.
     It is possible, of course, to modify the action with an additional field redefinition trun-
cated to order α′ , in such a way as to preserve conformal invariance and to restore the
T -duality symmetry (to the same order in α′ ) [476, 397]. The modified action has then
self-dual fixed points, but they are not smoothly connected to the perturbative vacuum, as
we have checked. See also [123, 149] for a discussion of the existence and position of the
fixed points in relation to the scale-factor duality of the higher-order action, and for the
difficulty of a higher-order, self-dual model of exit.
    The evolution of the background away from the fixed points, towards the low-energy,
post-big bang regime, becomes however possible if the action (8.52) is further generalized
by the inclusion of quantum loop correction (after all, the dilaton keeps growing while the
Universe is trapped in the fixed point, so that higher-order effects in the string coupling
are doomed to become eventually important). This point will be illustrated in the next
subsection.
    It should be noted, finally, that all examples of exit based on a truncated α′ expan-
sion are characterized by a certain degree of ambiguity, because the physical properties of
such models are field-redefinition-dependent [307], as already stressed. A truly unambigu-
ous example of exit should in principle correspond to the solution of an exact conformal
model, which automatically includes all orders in α′ (see [462], however, for a different
non-perturbative approach to higher-order corrections, based on the inclusion of the expo-
nentially growing density of all massive string-theory states, and on their possible role in
regularizing the singularity).
    There are in fact higher-curvature, exact conformal-field theory models that smoothly
interpolate between two duality-related low-energy solutions [416, 417]. In that cases, how-

                                              180
ever, it turns out impossible, in general, to describe the high-curvature regime in terms of
classical fields such as the metric and the dilaton, and we may lose an intuitive and geo-
metrical understanding of the transition (the conventional space-time interpretation is also
lost in other, higher-dimensional, string-theory resolutions of the cosmological singularities
[426]).
    Exact conformal models, for D = 2 and D = 3 string-cosmology backgrounds, have been
recently studied [215] in the context of gauged Wess–Zumino–Witten models [625], for the
SO(2, 1)/SO(1, 1) and SO(2, 2)/SO(2, 1) cosets. It turns out that it is possible, in some
cases, to avoid the curvature singularities, but the dilaton (and the string coupling) seems
to remain unbounded in correspondence of inflationary backgrounds.
    To conclude this subsection, devoted to higher-derivative corrections, we recall that a
higher-curvature regularization of the cosmological singularity can also be obtained in the
context of models implementing the so-called “limiting-curvature hypothesis” [491, 108,
485], applied to string cosmology in both the Einstein [104] and String [230] frames. They
are based on a higher-derivative action which, in the S-frame, takes the form
                             Z      q        h                           i
                         1
                  S=−            d4 x |g|e−φ R + (∇φ)2 + cψeγψ I2 + V (ψ) ,            (8.57)
                         2
where c and γ are constant parameters, ψ is a scalar Lagrangian multiplier, and
                                                        1/2
                                               2
                                        I2 = 4Rµν − R2          .                      (8.58)

Finally, V (ψ) is a potential that satisfies appropriate boundary conditions, V → ψ 2 for
|ψ| → 0, V → const for |ψ| → ∞, and has non-trivial zeros.
    Numerical and analytical studies then show that this action has regular spatially flat
and isotropic solutions, smoothly interpolating from contraction to expansion in the E-
frame [104], and from superinflation to decelerated expansion in the S-frame [230], even at
constant dilaton. A dynamical dilaton may increase the fraction of phase space for which
the curvature is bounded (in the absence of an appropriate potential, however, a dynamical
dilaton keeps growing). Unfortunately (and as in other models that will be discussed in
the next subsection), the action (8.57) is not derived from a string-theory expansion (the
higher-order terms are artificially constructed), so that the obtained results are only valid
as (interesting) phenomenological examples of possible approaches to the exit transition.


8.3   Growth of the coupling and loop corrections

According to the pre-big bang scenario, the tree-level effective action (8.2) can provide a
correct description of the Universe at low energies, during the initial evolution leading the
Universe away from the string perturbative vacuum, until the string coupling remains small,
exp φ ≪ 1. However, since φ is growing during pre-big bang inflation, in the absence of a


                                                 181
mechanism able to stop the growth of the dilaton, the Universe will tend to evolve towards
strong couplings, exp φ >
                        ∼ 1. In that regime all the higher-loop contributions will become
important, and since the fully corrected action is unknown, in general, we have to restrict
our studies to the simplest cases where we know the explicit form of the loop corrections.
     In all cases so far analysed in the literature, it was found that the inclusion of appro-
priate higher-order terms seems to damp the growth of H and φ̇, thus favouring the exit
transition. Indeed, in the presence of loop corrections, the “theorems” on the impossi-
bility of branch changing have to be generalized [547]; it becomes possible, in general, to
evade the obstructions present at the tree level if the loop functions satisfy appropriate
conditions. For a complete and successful transition it seems required, however, that the
quantum corrections be included at least to second order [122, 149] (the two examples of
smooth homogeneous isotropic solutions presented in Subsection 8.1 correspond indeed to
a two-loop (8.19) and to a four-loop (8.17) (non-local) potential).
    We wish to recall, at this point, that the quantum loop corrections are generated by
the higher-genus expansion of the world-sheet topology of the corresponding sigma-model
action [346], and can be represented as an expansion in powers of gs2 = eφ . They contain,
already to first order, the backreaction of particle production, which becomes important
when α′ H 2 eφ ∼ 1, and thus naturally introduce higher-derivative terms in the effective
action, as in general relativity (see for instance [484]), with the only difference that the
gravitational coupling is not fixed but is controlled by a dynamical dilaton.
    In string theory, as already mentioned, there are additional higher-derivative corrections
(typical of the minimal finite size λs = (2πα′ )1/2 of fundamental strings), which are gener-
ated by the α′ expansion of the sigma model action [346], and which may become important
even at small coupling, if the curvature reaches the string scale. The possible effects of such
higher-curvature terms, without loop corrections, have been discussed in the previous sub-
section. Here we shall start considering higher-genus corrections only, by assuming that
the strong-coupling regime is reached when the α′ corrections are still negligible (this is
certainly possible in some appropriate model of cosmological evolution, see [465]). As we
have already anticipated, however, both α′ and loop corrections seem to be required [279]
for a complete transition to the post-big bang regime.
    An unrealistic (but instructive) example of curvature regularization operated by the loop
corrections is provided by (a generalization of) the so-called CGHS model [139] of dilaton
gravity in D = 2 dimensions, described by the action
                               Z             h         i
                                       √
                       S=−         d2 x −ge−φ R + (∇φ)2 + Sone−loop       ,
                                         Z
                                     k           √              
                       Sone−loop =           d2 x −g R∇−2 R + ǫφR .                     (8.59)
                                     2
Here k = (N − 24)/24, where N is the number of conformal scalar fields possibly present
in the model, and the trace-anomaly term of the loop corrections has been supplemented


                                                182
by a local counterterm ǫφR, needed to preserve other classical symmetries. The case ǫ =
0 reproduces the original CGHS model, the case ǫ = 1 preserves conformal invariance
[202, 544], and has been applied to the string cosmology case in [533].
     The cosmological equations for the action (8.59) can be integrated exactly for any con-
stant value of ǫ [323], and it has been shown that for ǫ ≥ 1 there are regular solutions without
curvature singularities, describing a smooth evolution away from the (two-dimensional ver-
sion of the) pre-big bang branch of the vacuum solution, a ∼ (−t)−1 , φ ∼ −2 ln(−t). For
ǫ = 1 the curvature regularization requires k < 0 [533], which is known to correspond to
gravitational instabilities [544]. Regular examples that do notspoil the physical requirement
k > 0 are possible, however, provided ǫ > 1. In that case the smooth solutions describe,
for any ǫ, the evolution from a phase of pre-big bang superinflation to a final asymptotic
configuration with flat space, a = const, and linearly growing dilaton, φ = t. The solutions
can be expressed in parametric form as a function of the monotonic coupling parameter
gs (t) = exp[φ(t)/2] as follows [323]:
                                                          ǫ/4                         (ǫ−2)/4
                        β     β0           gs2                  2r + 2 + (ǫ − 2)gs2               r−1
             a(gs ) = e = e                                                                     e 2gs2 ,   (8.60)
                                   ǫ(r + gs2 ) + ǫ − 2                  gs2
                                                                    
                       g2                   1       ǫ
             φ̇(gs ) = s ,           2β̇ =       1 + gs2 − r ,
                      at0 r                at0 r    2
                        s
                                            ǫ2 4
             r(gs ) =   1 + (ǫ − 2)gs2 +      g ,                                                          (8.61)
                                            4 s
where t0 and β0 are integration constants, and gs (t) is given implicitly by
                                              Z
                                        t         dgs2
                                          =            r(gs ) a(gs ).                                      (8.62)
                                       t0          gs4

    In the above example the curvature and the dilaton kinetic enegy are bounded every-
where. The dilaton, however, keeps growing as t → +∞. It is true that a monotonic
evolution of the dilaton from weak to strong coupling may be equivalent, via S-duality
transformations [561, 523], to a smooth interpolation between two different, weak-coupling
regimes. In a realistic scenario, however, the final value of the dilaton should go to a fi-
nite constant, not to zero. To this aim, a non-perturbative dilaton potential and/or the
backreaction of the produced radiation are probably to be included.
    Unfortunately, however, the final state of the above regular backgrounds is still char-
acterized by φ˙ > 0. This means that the conditions of “branch changing” [121] are not
satisfied and that the background, in spite of the bounce of the curvature, is still in the
pre-big bang regime. As a consequence, it is not ready to be attracted to any stable mini-
mum of the potential, so that dilaton stabilization is impossible [323], even asymptotically,
in the context of the above one-loop action.
   Similar conclusions apply to the regular solutions of another (four-dimensional) model of
one-loop string effective action [34] (which also provided, to the best of our knowledge, the

                                                    183
first example of loop regularization of the cosmological singularity in a superstring-theory
context). The action is based on moduli-dependent loop corrections to the gravitational
coupling for a heterotic string compactified on a symmetric orbifold [32, 33]. There are no
corrections to the Einstein term, only quadratic-curvature corrections, and the action can
be written (in the E-frame, and using the notations of [34]) as
                          Z          q                                   
                      1                      1         3
                 S=           d4 x    |g| R + (∇µ φ)2 + (∇µ σ)2 + Sone−loop ,
                      2                      2         2
                                Z           q     h                   i
                 Sone−loop =         d4 x       |g| λeφ − δξ(σ)RGB
                                                                2
                                                                   .                  (8.63)

                               2
Here σ is the modulus field, RGB  = R2 − 4Rµν2 + R2
                                                    µναβ is the Gauss–Bonnet invariant, λ
                                               ′
and δ are constant parameters (λ is fixed by α , while δ depends on the number of chiral,
vector and gravitino massless supermultiplets included in the model). Finally,
                                                      h         i
                                         ξ(σ) = ln 2eσ η 4 (ieσ ) ,                   (8.64)

where η is the Dedekind function [242].
    For an isotropic and spatially flat background, the equations have been numerically
integrated in [34], and it has been shown that, for δ < 0, the action (8.63) admits regular
solutions without singularities, in which the curvature grows up to a maximum and then
decreases, with a behaviour that mimics that of the pre-big bang scenario. However, the
Hubble parameter turns out to be always positive even in the E-frame, and the dilaton
contribution is negligible, so that such solutions do not describe a transition from the pre-
to the post-big bang regime.
   The same action also admits regular homogeneous and isotropic solutions with positive
spatial curvature, k > 0 [232]. For such solutions the curvature invariants are bounded,
the metric smoothly evolves from contraction to expansion, and there is indeed a branch
changing. The dilaton has, however, a very small influence on the background, which is
dominated by the modulus and by the spatial curvature. In addition, the dilaton is mono-
tonically decreasing, so that such solutions do not describe the evolution of the Universe
away from the string perturbative vacuum, as required by the pre-big bang scenario.
    The regular, spatially flat solutions of the action (8.63) can be generalized to the
anisotropic case, corresponding to a Bianchi-I-type metric background [407, 628]. The reg-
ular, spatially curved (k > 0) solutions, however, cannot: for the corresponding anisotropic
curved metric, of Bianchi-IX-type, no regular solution of the action (8.63) has been ob-
tained [628]. This seems to be in agreement with an instability of the regular solutions of
the action (8.63) against tensor perturbations [406, 408], since the Bianchi-IX-type metric
may indeed be regarded as a model of closed Friedmann Universe with a non-linear tensor
perturbation, represented by a gravitational wave of given wave-number. In this sense, the
curvature regularization operated by the one-loop term (8.63) is generic for spatially flat
backgrounds, but non-generic for curved ones [628].

                                                      184
    It should be noted, finally, that the action (8.63) has also motivated the study of
scalar-tensor models of gravity characterized by the higher derivative, non-minimal cou-
            2 , with arbitrary coupling functions ξ(φ). Even in this case it has been found
pling ξ(φ)RGB
that there are, for appropriate forms of ξ(φ), singularity-free, homogeneous and isotropic
solutions, without [539] and with [402] spatial curvature, and also (in very special cases)
with a scalar potential [11]. But, again, such solutions do not describe the same initial con-
figuration as in the pre-big bang scenario. In addition, the higher-derivative, scalar-tensor
coupling is postulated ad-hoc, and is not the result of a reliable one-loop computation.
    An appropriate loop-corrected action for string cosmology has been discussed instead
in [259], considering the heterotic string compactified to four dimensions on a ZN orbifold,
and restricted to the gravidilaton-moduli sector, as in [34], but including in addition all
string α′ corrections (truncated to first order). The action contains modular-invariant loop
corrections to the Kähler potential, known to all orders [209], and one-loop corrections
to the gravitational couplings of the higher-derivative terms. The final action, neglecting
non-local terms, can be written in the S-frame (using the conventions of [259]) as:
                         Z      q                       
                     1      4         −φ            φ                3
            S =        ′
                           d  x  |g| e    R +  1 + e  G(φ)  (∇µ φ)2 − (∇µ σ)2
                    2α                                               2
                      α′                            
                    +     1 + eφ ∆(σ) RGB 2
                                             − (∇µ φ)4 ,                                 (8.65)
                       4

where ∆(σ) is a modular function depending on the compactification [34], and

                                              3α 6 + αeφ
                                   G(φ) =                    ,                           (8.66)
                                               2 (3 + αeφ )2

where α > 0 is a model-dependent constant of order 1.
    The cosmological equations of this action, for a homogeneous and spatially flat back-
ground, have been numerically integrated [259], starting from an initial pre-big bang regime
with H > 0 and φ̇ > 0. The integration shows that, while the α′ corrections can drive the
Universe to a fixed point with φ˙ < 0 (even in the absence of loop corrections, see the next
subsection), the loop corrections to the Kähler potential are essential to drive the Universe
to another fixed point with φ̇ < 2H, so that both conditions (8.12) and (8.13) (necessary
for a graceful exit [121]) can be satisfied. Such conditions are not sufficient, since a regular
solution requires that the curvature be bounded also in the E-frame. This result is achieved,
however, through the contribution of the (moduli-dependent) higher-derivative terms –at
least for the case of small σ̇ and/or nearly constant (negative) ∆(σ) discussed in [259].
    From the action (8.65), numerical solutions can thus be obtained, which smoothly in-
terpolate from the pre-big bang regime of the S-frame, tree-level effective action, to a final
decelerated expansion, with decreasing curvature. The curvature and dilaton kinetic energy
are bounded everywhere in the S-frame and E-frame. However, the post-big bang decel-
erated expansion becomes a phase of the de Sitter inflationary expansion in the E-frame,

                                               185
because the loop corrections to the dilaton kinetic term do not disappear, asymptotically,
but approach a constant value [259]. Also, for all the regular solutions, the dilaton remains
growing, logarithmically, as t → +∞. The dilaton cannot be stabilized being trapped in
the minimum of a potential, because it becomes unstable at strong couplings (its kinetic
term acquires the “wrong sign” even in the E-frame).
    In spite of this property, which means that the solutions do not describe a complete
transition to the post-big bang regime, the existence of such solutions represents a remark-
able and encouraging result, especially in view of the fact that the higher-order terms of
the action (8.65) are not ad hoc (except for the truncation of the α′ expansion), but are the
outcome of a well motivated string theory calculation. A complete example of transition
(but with ad hoc loop corrections) can be obtained instead, by considering the following
higher-order action [122]
                                   Z       q      h                 i
                        1
                    S=− 2              d4 x |g|e−φ R + (∇φ)2 + Sα′ + Sq + Sm ,                        (8.67)
                       2λs
where Sα′ contains the α′ corrections of Eq. (8.52), Sq provides the appropriate quantum
loop corrections, and Sm contains radiation, or a dilaton potential, for the final dilaton
stabilization.
    The loop corrections are required to give a negative contribution to the energy density,
are expected to become strong enough to drive the Universe away from the fixed point, and
to disappear fast enough at late times, in order for the dilaton to eventually be captured
by a potential or be frozen by radiation production. In the numerical examples presented
in [122], the one-loop corrections are suppressed at late times through the introduction of a
step function, or with the addition of a two-loop term of opposite sign. A toy model is the
following (in units 2λ2s = 1):
            Z      q                                          Z          q
     Sq =       d4 x |g| c1 + c2 eφ (∇φ)4 ,           Sm = c3           d4 x |g| (φ − φ0 )2 eφ−φ0 ,   (8.68)

where ci are dimensionless coefficients. As shown in [122], the numerical integration of the
cosmological equations with c1 = −c2 = −103 , c3 = −10−1 , φ0 = 1, provides a complete
model of graceful exit in which the background smoothly evolves from the vacuum, pre-big
bang configuration of the tree-level action, to a final expanding, decelerated configuration,
with the dilaton performing damped oscillations around φ0 = 1. The model can be further
improved with the introduction of radiation, which eventually becomes dominant and freezes
out the dilaton.
    Other examples of a smooth and complete graceful exit, but again with ad hoc loop
corrections, can be obtained with the following higher-order action [149]:
                       Z       q           h                                                    i
            1                                                                (1)          (2)
        S=− 2              d4 x |g|e−φ R + (∇φ)2 + Lα′ + Aeφ Lα′ + Be2φ Lα′ ,                         (8.69)
           2λs
where Lα′ is the most general form of the first-order α′ corrections to the gravidilaton
action [482], on which the condition has been imposed that the equations of motion contain

                                                   186
at most second derivatives:
                          α′ h 2                                         i
                  Lα′ =       aRGB + bGµν ∇µ φ∇ν φ + c(∇φ)2 ∇2 φ + d(∇φ)4 .                     (8.70)
                          4
The coefficients a, b, c, d, in order to reproduce string scattering amplitudes, are constrained
by
                                 a = −1,       b + 2(c + d) = −2a,                        (8.71)
but are otherwise arbitrary, because of possible further shifts due to field redefinitions,
truncated to first order in α′ (note that our notation is diferent from [149], where they use a
different normalization for the dilaton, i.e. gs2 = e2φ ; see also [148]). The one-loop and two-
              (1)      (2)
loop terms, Lα′ and Lα′ , have the same functional form as Lα′ , but the coefficients a, b, c, d
are in principle replaced by different numbers, a1 , b1 , c1 , d1 and a2 , b2 , c2 , d2 , respectively.
Finally, the constant parameters A and B control the onset of loop corrections and their
late-time suppression for a successful exit.
    The study of the fixed points in the weak-coupling regime of the action (8.69), and of
the subsequent transition to the decelerated expansion of the post-big bang scenario, has
shown that the case a = −d, b = c = 0 (discussed in [307, 122]) is not the only one that
is compatible with a graceful exit. There is indeed a wide region in parameter space that
allows fixed points with φ˙ < 0 and, from the fixed points, the transition can further proceed
successfully even if b and c are non-zero [149] and different from b1 , c1 and b2 , c2 [148]. In
all cases, the exit can be completed by dilaton stabilization, obtained by introducing “by
hand” some radiation density ρr , coupled to the dilaton through the conservation equation
                                                  1
                                      ρ̇r + 4Hρr − Γφ̇2 = 0.                                    (8.72)
                                                  2

    The main problem with such models of exit is that the one-loop and two-loop correc-
tions are not the result of a reliable string theory perturbative expansion. In particular, a
successful exit seems to require (as also stressed in [122]) an appropriate sign of the cor-
rections, so that (in our case) sign{A} = − sign{B}. It is unclear, however, whether the
required sign may also be the outcome of a correct loop computation (even if the results of
[259] seem to provide a positive answer). A successful example of exit, corresponding to a
numerical integration of the equations for the action (8.69) with A = 1, B = −2 × 10−3 , is
illustrated in Fig. 8.5.
    In addition, the perturbative approach at the two-loop level is self-consistent only for a
quite small value of the final coupling, exp φ ≪ 1. A small value of the final dilaton, for the
solutions of the action (8.69), seems to require, however, that A and B be both larger than
1 and of the same order (in modulus) [148], in contrast with the usual expectation for the
coefficients of a perturbative expansion.
    If the string coupling is not kept small enough, on the other hand, the Universe nec-
essarily enters the non-perturbative regime where typical M-theory effects may become

                                                 187
             1.5                                                                                   1.75   3H
                       •                                                                           1.5
                   φ                          0.25 ln gS
               1                                                                                   1.25
                                                                                                      1
             0.5                                                                                   0.75
                           H
                                                                                                   0.5
        -5         5           10   15   20      25        30   35              •                  0.25
                                                                                φ-3H
         -0.5                                                              -2   -1.5   -1   -0.5               0.5




Figure 8.5: Numerical integration of the cosmological equations for the action (8.69) with
A = 1, B = −2 × 10−3 , a = a1 = a2 = −d = −d1 = −d2 = −1, Γ = 5.63 × 10−4 , and
all bi , ci = 0. The left panel shows the time evolution of φ̇, H and of the log of the string
coupling. The right panel shows the evolution from the vacuum to the fixed point of Fig.
8.4, and the subsequent exit induced by the loop corrections.

important, as will be illustrated in Subsection 8.5. We shall first present, however, some
arguments stressing the importance of the notion of entropy for a model-independent ap-
proach to the exit problem.


8.4   Graceful exit and entropy considerations

After the various models of exit reported in the previous subsections, it seems appropriate
to recall, at this point, that entropy-related considerations have recently led to model-
independent arguments in favour of the occurrence of a graceful exit in the pre-big bang
scenario. As we shall see, those are physically quite close to the arguments based on
backreaction and loop corrections, which we have already discussed.
    Let us start by recalling that, as suggested by Bekenstein [72, 74], the entropy of a
limited gravity system of energy E and of size R larger than its gravitational radius, R >
Rg ≡ 2GN E, is limited by the upper bound

                                                  SBek = ER ≃ Rg R λ−2
                                                                    P .                                              (8.73)

According to the holographic principle (see [375, 574] and references therein), on the other
hand, the maximal entropy of a system is bounded by Shol ,

                                                            Shol = Aλ−2
                                                                     P ,                                             (8.74)

where A is the area of the space-like surface enclosing the region of space whose entropy we
wish to bound. For systems of limited gravity, since R > Rg and A = R2 , the Bekenstein
bound (8.73) implies the holography bound (8.74).
    How can these bounds be extended to be applied to the whole Universe? At cosmologi-
cal scales the Universe is not a system of limited gravity, since its large-distance behaviour

                                                                     188
is determined by the gravitational effect of its matter content through Friedmann’s equa-
tions. Furthermore, the holography bound obviously fails for sufficiently large regions of
space since, for a given temperature, entropy grows like R3 while area grows like R2 . The
generalization of entropy bounds to cosmology turned out to be subtle.
    A possible prescription [73] for a cosmological extension is to identify R in Eq. (8.73)
with the particle horizon. In this way one can then arrive at the conclusion that the bound
is violated sufficiently near the big-bang singularity, implying that the latter is fake (if
the bound is always valid). More recently, a similar extension of the holographic bound
to cosmology has been proposed [254], arguing that the area of the particle horizon should
bound entropy on the backward-looking light cone, according to (8.74). It was soon realized,
however, that the such a proposal requires modifications, since violations of it were found to
occur in physically reasonable situations. An improvement of the proposal [254], applicable
to light-like hypersurfaces, was later made by Bousso [96, 97] (see also [256]).
    Of more interest, in our context, are however the attempts made at deriving cosmological
entropy bounds on space-like hypersurfaces [231, 604, 48, 91, 392, 127]. These identify the
maximal size of a spatial region for which holography works: the Hubble radius [231, 604,
392], the so-called apparent horizon [114], or, finally, a causal-connection (Jeans) scale [127].
    For our purpose there is no need here to enter into the relative merits of these various
proposals. Rather, we will only outline the physical idea behind them. Consider, inside a
quasi-homogeneous Universe, a sphere of radius H −1 . We may consider “isolated” bodies,
in the sense of Ref. [72], fully contained in the sphere, i.e. with radius R < H −1 . For
such systems, the bound (8.73) holds, and it is saturated by a black hole of size R. We
may next consider several black holes inside our Hubble volume, each carrying an entropy
proportional to the square of its mass. If two, or more, of these black holes merge, their
masses will add up, while the total entropy after the merging, being quadratic in the total
mass, will exceed the sum of the initial entropies. In other words, in order to maximize
entropy, it pays to form black holes as large as possible.
    Is there a limit to this process of entropy increase? The suggestion made in [231, 604,
48, 392, 127], which finds support in old results by several groups [147, 146, 505], is that a
critical length of order H −1 is the upper limit on how large a classically stable black hole
can be. If we accept this hypothesis, the upper bound on the entropy contained in a given
region R of space will be given by the number of Hubble volumes in R, nH = V H 3 times
the Bekenstein–Hawking entropy [71, 369] of a black hole of radius H −1 , H −2 λ−2
                                                                                 P . The two
factors can be combined in the suggestive formula:
                                          Z              √
                             S(R) < λ−2
                                     P            d3 x       h H ≡ SHB ,                  (8.75)
                                              R
      R     √
where R d3 x h is the volume of the space-like hypersurface whose entropy we wish to
bound, and H differs from one proposal to another, but is, roughly, of the order of the
Hubble parameter. Actually, since H is proportional to the trace of the second fundamental

                                                  189
form on the hypersurface, Eq. (8.75) reminds us of the boundary term that has to be added
to the gravitational action in order to correctly derive Einstein’s equations from the usual
variational principle. This shows that the bound (8.75) is generally covariant for H = H.
It can also be written covariantly for the identification of H made in [127].
     For the qualitative discussion that follows, let us therefore take H = H, and let us
convert the bound to S-frame quantities, taking into account the relation between λP and
λs , given in Eq. (1.25). We obtain [604]:

                        S(R) < (V H 3 )(H −2 λ−2
                                              s e
                                                 −φ
                                                    ) = e−φ̄ Hλ−2
                                                               s ,                    (8.76)

where we have fixed an arbitrary additive constant in the definition of φ̄. Equation (8.76)
thus connects very simply the entropy bound of a region of fixed comoving volume to the
most important variables occurring in string cosmology (see, e.g., the phase diagram of Fig.
8.1).
    An immediate application of the bound (8.76) to the exit problem was pointed out in
[604], noting that the bound is initially saturated in the E-frame picture of pre-big bang
inflation as a collapse, with corresponding black-hole formation [129]. Since the entropy,
and the bound itself, cannot decrease without a violation of the second law, one obtains:

                                        φ˙ ≤ Ḣ/H .                                   (8.77)

It is easy to check that this relation holds with the equality sign during the initial, low-
energy evolution from the string perturbative vacuum (see Eq. (8.5)). In other words, the
Hubble entropy bound is saturated initially and throughout the low-energy, dilaton-driven
evolution described in [129]. But what happens if the curvature stops its growth, Ḣ = 0
(for instance, during the high-curvature string phase discussed in the previous subsections)?
It is quite clear that Eq. (8.77) does not allow H to reach saturation (Ḣ = 0) in the upper-
right quadrant of Fig. 8.1, since φ˙ > 0 there. Instead, saturation of H in the upper-left
quadrant (where φ˙ ≤ 0) is perfectly all right. But this implies having attained the sought
for branch change!
   Let us now look at the loop corrections. Physically, these correspond to taking into
account the backreaction from particle production, i.e. from the quantum fluctuations
amplified by the cosmological evolution. Let us check when their entropy starts to threaten
the bound. Using the results presented in [297, 298, 106, 107], the entropy density carried
by quantum fluctuations inside a region of size H −1 is given by

                                       σq ∼ Neff H 3 ,                                (8.78)

where Neff is the effective number of species that are amplified. This entropy equals the
upper bound (8.76) precisely when

                             Neff H 2 λ2s eφ ∼ Neff H 2 λ2P ∼ 1.                      (8.79)

                                            190
But this is also the line on which the energy density in quantum fluctuations is expected
to become critical, and the backreaction of the produced radiation is expected to drive the
Universe to the beginning of the standard radiation-dominated phase [275, 135].
    Indeed, one can easily estimate the total energy stored in the quantum fluctuations
amplified by the pre-big bang backgrounds (for a discussion of generic perturbation spectra,
see [135, 119]). The result is, roughly,
                                                4
                                     ρq ∼ Neff Hmax ,                                 (8.80)
where Hmax is the maximal curvature scale reached around the exit transition. The sat-
uration of the entropy bound is thus equivalent to the condition that the above energy
density becomes critical (and induces the exit) just around the transition scale Hmax . On
the other hand, we have already argued that Hmax ∼ Ms = λ−1       s , and we know that, in
heterotic string theory, Neff is in the hundreds. It follows, according to this picture, that
                                                                 −1
the exit may occur when the dilaton satisfies exp(φexit ) ∼ Neff    ∼ 10−2 , i.e. at a value
of the string coupling very close to its present one. The saturation of the Hubble entropy
bound SHB thus supports a picture in which the exit transition occurs to avoid violations
of the (generalized) second law of thermodynamics, and it is induced by the backreaction
of quantum fluctuations (see also [114] and the numerical examples of [149]).
    Remarkably, this also explains why the radiation, which originates from the quantum
fluctuations and dominates our final Friedmann phase, has an entropy that roughly cor-
responds to the number of elementary “Hubble spheres” (i.e. spatial regions of size H −1 )
contained inside our Universe just after the exit (namely, to the entropy of the quantum
fluctuations evaluated at the string scale): S ∼ nH ∼ 1090 . A very large number, on the one
hand, but a very small entropy for the total mass and size of our present observable Uni-
verse, on the other hand, as often emphasized by Penrose [515]. The pre-big bang scenario
may thus neatly explain why the Universe, at the big bang, looks so fine-tuned (without
being so), and may provide a natural arrow of time in the direction of higher entropy [604].
    In conclusion, the picture that finally emerges from all these considerations is best
illustrated with reference to the diagram of Fig. 8.6. Two lines are shown, representing
boundaries for the possible evolution. The horizontal boundary is forced upon by the
large-curvature corrections, while the tilted line in the first quadrant corresponds to the
equation λ2P H 2 Neff = 1 that we have just discussed. This line was also suggested as a
boundary beyond which copious production of 0-branes would set in [465] (see the next
subsection). Thus, depending on initial conditions, the pre-big bang bubble corresponding
to our Universe would hit first either the high-curvature or the large-entropy boundary and
initiate an exit phase. Hopefully, a universal late-time attractor will emerge guiding the
evolution into the FRW phase of standard cosmology.
    Needless to say, all these arguments have to be considered, at best, as having heuristic
value. If we were to take them seriously, they would suggest that the Universe will never
enter the strong-coupling, strong-curvature regime, where the largely unknown M-theory

                                            191
                                         S   H                 2    2
                                                           S       H e    1 / Neff
                                                       full M-Theory
                             ' corrections


                                                                          loops and
                                                                         backreaction
                                                        D=11
                                                       SUGRA

                             perturbative        1/ Neff                              2
                                                                                     gS   e
                               region




Figure 8.6: Logarithmic plot of the curvature scale versus the string coupling gs2 . The two
parallel diagonal lines emerging from the bottom-left quadrant represent possible trajecto-
ries for the (low-energy) pre-big bang evolution, corresponding to different initial values of
the dilaton.

should be used. The low-energy limit of the latter (the much better understood D = 11
supergravity) could suffice to deal with the fundamental exit problem of string cosmology.
We refer to the next subsection for a short discussion of this possibility.


8.5   M-theory and brane cosmology

If the growth of the string coupling, which starts during the phase of accelerated pre-big bang
evolution, is not stopped at some point by a dilaton potential (or by some other mechanism),
the Universe necessarily enters the strong-coupling regime described by the so-called M-
theory, which is well approximated, at low-energy, by the known D = 11 supergravity
theory [626]. In this subsection we will briefly report various ideas on the possibility of
smoothing out the big bang singularity, and eventually implement the exit transition, in
the context of the low-energy (i.e. small-curvature) limit of M-theory.
   We start be recalling the action for the bosonic sector of eleven-dimensional supergravity,
                 Z            
                     11√            1 2
      S11 =        d x −g R − FABCD               −
                                   48
                                                                                              
                     1      A1 A2 A3 B1 B2 B3 B4 C1 C2 C3 C4
                      √   ǫ                                  A        F           F
                                                              A1 A2 A3 B1 B2 B3 B4 C1 C2 C3 C4 , (8.81)
                 (12)4 −g

where F is the field strength of the antisymmetric three-form potential ABCD , and the
Chern–Simons term arises as a consequence of supersymmetry [186] (upper-case Latin in-
dices run from 0 to 10, Greek indices from 0 to 9, and we follow the conventions of [87]. The
ten-dimensional effective action, obtained by compactification of S11 on a circle of radius



                                                 192
r11 (controlled by the dilaton [627]) can be written as
                      Z                                                   
                               √                                   1 2     1 2
            S11 =         d10 x −g        e−φ R + (∇φ)2 −            Hµνα − Fµναβ
                                                                  12       48
                                                                                               
                             1
                      −      √   ǫα1 α2 µ1 µ2 µ3 µ4 ν1 ν2 ν3 ν4 Bα1 α2 Fµ1 µ2 µ3 µ4 Fν1 ν2 ν3 ν4 ,   (8.82)
                          384 −g

where H and F are the field strengths of the antisymmetric potentials Bµν and Aµνα ,
respectively, and we have dropped the one-form potential arising from the dimensional
reduction of the metric. After the reduction, we have also rescaled the ten-dimensional
metric as gµν → r11 gµν , and we have defined the ten-dimensional dilaton as φ = 3 ln r11 .
    The above action contains not only the usual string theory action, but also Ramond
forms, i.e. higher-rank antisymmetric tensors uncoupled to the dilaton (in the S-frame), and
exactly reproducing the Ramond–Ramond sector of the low-energy Type II A superstring
action (see for instance [437]). This provides a new, in principle richer context to look for
cosmological solutions [452, 391, 446, 183] (see [87] for a complete analysis of spatially flat
models), suggesting also the possibility of an M-theory version of the pre-big bang scenario
[151].
    In such a context, the existence of black p-brane solutions, of the type of those given
in [69, 527], provides a first indication of a possible resolution of the problem of curvature
singularities [426, 453] (see also [70] for examples including α′ corrections). The different
branches of a cosmological solution can indeed be related by U -duality transformations [449],
but an explicit representation of a smooth exit transition, in this context, is problematic
[110]. By U -duality it is possible, however, to transform a singular solution into a non-
singular one (as in the case of O(d, d)-covariant backgrounds [308, 309]). This possibility
has been studied, in particular, in the moduli space of D = 11 supergravity compactified
on a ten-torus [51].
    In addition, the decompactification of the 11-th dimension, produced in the strong-
coupling regime as a consequence of the identification of the string coupling with the 11-
th dimensional scale factor [627, 376, 377], is possibly associated with a “softening” of
curvature singularities, as pointed out in [393]. The study of some explicit examples has
shown [249], in particular, that the curvature singularity of FWR models minimally coupled
to a set of scalar fields, in four dimensions, can be removed by lifting the solutions to higher
dimensions, provided the four-dimensional background M4 has negative or vanishing spatial
curvature (k ≤ 0). In that case, the regular higher-dimensional backgrounds from which
M4 is obtained by dimensional reduction has only one of the extra dimensions that is
dynamical, and for k = 0 it coincides with the trivial Minkowski space-time parametrized
by Milne coordinates.
    A genuinely new effect, in the context of dimensionally reduced supergravity theories,
is the presence of p-branes, and the possibility of their production in the strong coupling
regime where the brane states become light and (possibly) unstable. This effect might

                                                    193
lead to regularizing the curvature singularities, as first proposed in some pioneering papers
on string [427] and solitonic p-brane [529] production in cosmological backgrounds. As
suggested in [537], brane production might lead for instance to a phase of constant brane
density, and then brane-driven (de Sitter) inflation (reminescent of the old idea of string-
driven inflation [591]), thus freezing the growth of the background curvature. We should
recall, finally, that brane production in high-energy scattering processes is also allowed for
conventional Einstein gravity in models with large extra dimensions [7, 8].
    More generally, as suggested in [465], when approaching the singularity one should
describe the Universe not in terms of the metric and of the dilaton, but in terms of new
low-energy modes, more appropriate to the strong-coupling regime where D(irichelet) p-
branes are the fundamental players. Indeed, in the string frame, their tension is controlled
by gs−2 = exp(−φ), so that they are very light at strong coupling: for instance, a Dp-brane
of type II A has a mass
                                  m ∼ gs−1 (α′ )−(p+1)/2 .                            (8.83)

    In addition, they become unstable at large enough values of the Hubble parameter (an
effect very similar to string instability in curved backgrounds [551, 314]), so that they can be
copiously produced when approaching the singularity, and in particular around the epoch
where [465] gs Hλs ∼ 1. As a consequence of this huge production, the Dp-brane energy
density is expected to become critical, inducing a transition towards the standard radiation-
dominated phase. If so, the curvature scale H ∼ λ−1   P would be the largest value of curvature
probed during the cosmological evolution [465].
    More recently, the idea of a brane-dominated Universe has been further developed in the
context of the so-called “brane gas cosmology” approach [10, 229] to the M-theory phase
of the very early Universe (which generalised previous string-cosmology models [109, 582]).
The Universe, in the strong-coupling regime, is assumed to have nine spatial dimensions in
a toroidal topological state, and to be filled with a hot gas of p-branes, with all modes in
(approximate) thermal equilibrium. This approach aims not only at the resolution of the
singularity problem, but also at providing a possible explanation of the number of spatial
dimensions of our present Universe, along the lines of [109].
    The model contains all the branes that appear in the spectrum of the (ten-dimensional)
Type II A string theory. By recalling that M-theory contains the graviton (0-brane), 2-
branes and 5-branes as fundamental degress of freedom (see the action (8.81)), the com-
pactification on a circle S 1 leads to 0-branes, strings (1-branes), 2-branes, 4-branes, 5-
branes, 6-branes and 8-branes (see Eq. (8.82)) as the fundamental extended objects of the
10-dimensional theory. The total action for the brane gas model is thus the sum of the
low-energy effective action for the “bulk” (ten-dimensional) space-time manifold plus the
(p + 1)-dimensional action of all the branes in the gas:
                                                X
                                  S = Sbulk +       Si (brane),                          (8.84)
                                                i


                                              194
where S = Sbulk is the gravidilaton–axion sector of the action (8.82); and the Born–Infeld
action of a p-brane, coupled to the bulk via delta function sources with strength fixed by
the tension Tp , is given by
                           Z
                                                                     1/2
                 Sp = Tp       dp+1 ξ e−φ −det gmn + bmn + 2πα′ Fmn           .       (8.85)

Here gmn is the induced metric on the brane, bmn is the induced antisymmetric tensor, and
Fmn is a gauge field possibly living on the brane.
    All branes contribute to the energy of such a primordial gas with three types of modes
[10]. There are winding modes, corresponding to p-branes wrapping around p cycles of the
torus, momentum modes, corresponding to the centre-of-mass motion of the brane, and
oscillatory modes, corresponding to fluctuations in the directions transverse to the brane.
The brane action (8.85) can thus be expanded in terms of these modes, and by taking the
average contribution of their stress tensor one obtains the effective “equation of state” for
the gas of winding modes;
                                        pe/ρ = −p/d                                    (8.86)
(pe is the pressure, p the rank of the brane). The momentum modes have the “dual” equation
of state pe/ρ = p/d (for strings, p = 1, one recovers the results of [314, 315]). Transverse
oscillations can be viewed as particles living on the brane, and their equation of state is
that of “ordinary” matter, with 0 ≤ pe ≤ 1. It follows, from the covariant conservation of
the stress tensor, that the energy Ep of winding (w) modes increases with the scale factor
a(t) as
                                         Ep = ρad ∼ Tp ap                             (8.87)
(note, however, that should be included at very high temperature thermal corrections , and
that this can modify the effective equation of state, as discussed in [341] for the case of
strings near the Hagedorn scale).
   The Universe, in the strong-coupling (M-theory) regime, is thus assumed to behave as
a hot soup of all modes of all p-branes. The curvature singularity is expected to be avoided
because of T -duality exchanging w-modes and momentum modes, and then transforming
a phase of increasing temperature into decreasing temperature, with the fixed point of
the symmetry acting as a regularizing cut-off for all physical observables [10, 229]. But
the most interesting (and probably unique, at present) virtue of this scenario seems to
be the possibility of explaining why our present Universe contains just three large spatial
dimensions.
    Indeed, as the primordial Universe expands, the w-modes tend to become dominant as
their energy increases, starting with the largest value of p, according to Eq. (8.87). The
effect of the w-modes, on the other hand, is to halt the expansion [582], so that the spatial
dimensions can decompactify (i.e. inflate away from the string scale) only if the w-modes
disappear.


                                             195
    They can disappear by annihilation with antiwinding (w) modes (the initial number of
w and w is assumed to be the same, by symmetry). On the other hand, assuming that the
space is periodic, it follows that the world-volume of two p-branes will necessarily intersect
in at most 2p + 1 spatial dimensions. In the initial Universe d = 9, so that winding p-branes
with p = 8, 6, 5, 4 have no problem to self-annihilate. We are thus left with 2-branes and
strings. The annihilation of the (heavier) winding 2-branes will first allow five dimensions
to become large. Within this distinguished torus T 5 , the 1-branes (strings) w-modes will
then only allow the d = 3 subspace T 3 to expand.
    In this way, one can understand the origin of the d = 3 dimensionality of our Uni-
verse and, interestingly enough, can predict a hierarchical structure of the ten-dimensional
compact manifold as follows [10]:
                                                          
                               M = S1 × T 4 × T 2 × T 3 ,                              (8.88)

where S 1 comes from the original M-theory compactification on a circle, and the other
compact manifolds have been listed in order of growing size, from left to right.
    In this context, a possible problem is that, at the end of the decompactification process,
at least one w-mode is left per Hubble volume, leading to the well known domain-wall
problem. This problem can be solved if the w-modes, before they annihilate, drive the
background to a phase of slight contraction, also called “loitering” [549], during which the
Hubble horizon becomes larger than the spatial size of the Universe (as in the phase of
pre-big bang inflation, when it is seen as a contraction in the E-frame).
   By supplementing the string-cosmology equations by terms describing the annihilation
of w-modes into string loops [103], it has been shown that during the loitering phase all
w-modes are eliminated and that, from this point on, the Universe begins to expand again.
The w-modes annihilation leads to breaking T -duality, and it is tempting to speculate
that this effect could be related to SUSY breaking, and to the mechanism of dilaton mass
generation needed to stabilize the coupling after decompactification [103].
    Outside the context of brane gas cosmology, but always in the context of an M-theory
approach to the strong coupling regime, a more drastic resolution of the dimensionality
problem is represented by the so-called brane-world scenario (inspired by heterotic M-theory
[376, 377]), in which our Universe is assumed to coincide with a 3-brane embedded in a
higher-dimensional bulk manifold [450, 451].
    In a realistic picture, of course, our 3-brane is not expected to be the only extended
object embedded in the bulk manifold, especially in the regime of large bulk dilaton, and
very strong coupling. In that case, the transition to the post-big bang regime could be
triggered by a head-on collision against another brane, just as happens in the context of
the so-called “ekpyrotic” scenario [412, 413], where the big bang explosion, and the birth
of a hot, radiation-dominated Universe, is simulated by the collision of two 3-branes along
a (hidden) fifth spatial dimension (see also [325] for a similar but spherically symmetric

                                               196
process of bubble collision).
     In the ekpyrotic scenario the 11-th space-time is assumed to have topology M 10 ×
S 1 /Z2 , with two branes at the orbifolds fixed points, where space-time has boundaries. Six
dimensions are compactified on a Calabi–Yau threefold, leaving the effective theory five-
dimensional. The boundary branes are called the visible and the hidden brane, the visible
one being identified with our Universe.
   The action for this model is the sum of three parts:

                                    S = Shet + SI + SM ,                                 (8.89)

where SI represents the brane interactions, SM describes the matter on the brane created
by the collision, and Shet is the action of five-dimensional heterotic M-theory. With the
conventions of [412]:
                      Z                                       
                M53    √      1        1
       Shet =      d5 x −g R − (∇φ)2 − e2φ FABCDE
                                             2
                 2            2        5!
         X        Z     p                                                       
                                     1
       −   3αi M53 d4 ξi −hi e−φ − √      ǫµναβ AABCD ∂µ XiA ∂ν XiB ∂α XiC ∂β XiD .
         i
                                  4! −hi
                                                                                         (8.90)

Here M5 is the five-dimensional Planck mass, F is the field strength of the four-form AABCD ,
hiµν is the induced metric on the i-th 3-brane, whose embedding in five dimensions is de-
scribed by the five parametric equations XiA = XiA (ξiµ ). Finally, the tensions are given by
Ti = αi M53 .
   In the first version of the ekpyrotic scenario [412], besides the two boundary branes,
there is a third “bulk” brane, possibly originated from spontaneous bubble nucleation. In
that case, the three tensions satisfy the condition α2 = −α1 −α3 , with α3 > 0 and α3 < |α1 |,
and the bulk brane is attracted towards the visible brane, until they collide. The kinetic
energy of the bulk brane is then converted into matter and radiation of the visible brane,
with a spectrum of density perturbations left impressed by the quantum fluctuations of the
bulk brane.
    In the second version of the scenario [413], there are instead only the two boundary
branes, which collide and then bounce apart, in what is hoped to be a non-singular pro-
cess. This second possibility also represents an important ingredient in a related, recently
proposed “cyclic” model of Universe [573].
    In our context, this second possibility is particularly interesting because the collision of
the two boundary branes is associated to the collapse of the dimension transverse to the
brane: namely, of the 11-th dimension, taking into account the Calabi-Yau compactification.
But the shrinking of the eleven-dimensional radius r11 , in an M-theory context, is equivalent
to a decreasing of the string coupling (recall that r11 = exp(φ/3)). This means that the


                                              197
collision, and the subsequent beginning of the radiation-dominated, post-big bang evolution,
occurs at very weak coupling, in the perturbative regime.
    In conclusion, this model suggests that the space-time manifold, after having reached the
strong-coupling, M-theory regime as a consequence of the pre-big bang evolution, and after
the associated production of branes, might be forced again to the perturbative regime by
the attraction (and by the subsequent collapse) of the branes at the boundary of the D = 11
space-time. The exit would thus proceed at weak coupling (possibly with a mechanism of
radiation production different from the one discussed in the previous subsections). This
may perhaps justify the use of the tree-level effective action for the quantum cosmology
approach to the exit, presented in the next section.


9    Quantum string cosmology

According to the pre-big bang scenario, the present cosmological state of our Universe should
emerge as the result of a long evolution, starting from the string perturbative vacuum.
Such an evolution necessarily includes the transition from a phase of growing curvature and
strong coupling to a phase of decreasing curvature and (nearly) constant string coupling.
The full dynamical description of such a process still contains various problematic aspects,
as discussed in the previous section.
    Since the transition is expected to occur in the high-curvature (nearly Planckian) regime,
where quantum-gravity effects may become important, it is not excluded that a quantum-
cosmology approach may be appropriate to describe the “decay” of the string perturbative
vacuum into our present, post-big bang Universe. Also in the context of the standard
inflationary scenario, in fact, the quantum-cosmology approach is required to describe the
“birth” of our classical Universe out of the Planckian regime [613]. With an important
difference, however: in the standard scenario the initial state of the Universe is unknown,
and has to be fixed through some ad hoc prescription. There are various possible choices
for the initial boundary conditions [366, 370, 609, 440, 633, 541, 611], leading in general to
different quantum pictures of the early cosmological evolution. In the pre-big bang scenario,
on the contrary, the initial state is fixed in such a way as to approach, asymptotically, the
string perturbative vacuum, and this unambiguously determines the initial wave function.
    In a quantum cosmology context the Universe is described by a wave function evolving
in superspace, according to the Wheeler–De Witt (WDW) equation [216, 622], and it is
always possible, in principle, to compute the transition probability between two different
geometrical configurations –in particular, from a pre- to a post-big bang state. We shall re-
port here the results obtained in the context of what may be called a “low-energy” approach
to quantum-string cosmology [282], which is based on the lowest-order string effective ac-
tion, and in which no higher-order (α′ and loop) corrections are taken into account into the
WDW equation, except those possibly encoded into an effective, non-perturbative dilaton


                                             198
potential (see [525, 526, 552] for high-curvature contributions to the WDW equation).
    Such a low-energy approach, first introduced in string cosmology in [143, 79, 434], is
analogous (in the particle case) to low-energy quantum mechanics, where one neglects rela-
tivistic and higher-order corrections. It is a first approximation, which is already sufficient
to take into account pure quantum-gravity effects, such as the possibility of transitions
which are classically forbidden –in particular, transitions between two low-energy geomet-
ric configurations which are classically disconnected by a singularity [310, 322, 154]– and
thus to motivate a “minisuperspace approach” to the exit problem [279] (see also [474, 511]
for a recent quantum-cosmology approach to this problem based on the Bohm–de Broglie
ontological interpretation of quantum mechanics).
    Quite irrespectively of its applications, quantum-string cosmology may represent a rich
and interesting field of research in itself; it thus seems appropriate to recall that it is affected
by various conceptual problems already present in the “standard” quantum-cosmology con-
text: the meaning of the probabilistic interpretation [610], the existence and the meaning
of a semiclassical limit [79, 434], the unambiguous identification of the time-like coordinate
(see however [152]). Other problems affecting the standard scenario, however, disappear.
In particular, in the context of the pre-big bang scenario, there is no problem of boundary
conditions, which are unambiguously prescribed by the choice of the string perturbative
vacuum (see Subsection 9.2); no problem either of operator ordering in the WDW equation
(see for instance [36]), as the ordering is fixed by the duality symmetry of the string effective
action [310, 410]. This important property of quantum-string cosmology will be illustrated
in the next subsection.


9.1    The Wheeler–De Witt equation

The simplest example of quantum-string cosmology model is based on the lowest-order,
gravidilaton string effective action
                                  Z            q         h                        i
                         1
                 S = − d−1            dd+1 x   |g| e−φ R + (∇µ φ)2 + V (φ, gµν ) ,            (9.1)
                      2 λs
where we have included a (possibly non-local and non-perturbative) dilaton potential V
(see [153] for more complete models based on the M-theory action). If we are considering,
in particular, an isotropic and spatially flat cosmological background,
                                                                           
                      φ = φ(t),                gµν = diag N 2 (t), −a2 (t)δij ,               (9.2)

the gravidilaton system has only two physical degrees of freedom, the scale factor a and the
                                   √
dilaton (the “lapse” function N = g00 can be arbitrarily fixed by a choice of gauge). The
quantum evolution of the system is thus associated to a two-dimensional “minisuperspace”,
which, assuming spatial sections of finite volume, can be conveniently parametrized by
                        √                          √          Z
                    β = d ln a,            φ = φ − d β − ln     dd x/λds .             (9.3)


                                                   199
Each “point” {β(t), φ(t)} of the minisuperspace will then represent a classical solution of
the action (9.1).
   In terms of the coordinates of the minisuperspace, the action (after integration by parts)
can be explicitly written as
                                         Z                                                   
                                 λs                 e−φ          2
                              S=                 dt     β̇ 2 − φ˙ − N 2 V (β, φ) .                                 (9.4)
                                 2                   N
Its variation with respect to g00 defines the total energy density of the gravidilaton system,
and leads to the so-called Hamiltonian constraint (in the cosmic time gauge, N = 1):
                                                  
                                              δS                     2
                                    H=                         = φ˙ − β̇ 2 − V = 0.                                (9.5)
                                              δN       N =1

Introducing the canonical momenta
                          !                                                            !
                    δS                                                           δS
           Πβ =                      = λs β̇ e    −φ
                                                       ,                 Πφ =                     = −λs φ˙ e−φ ,   (9.6)
                    δβ̇       N =1                                               δφ˙       N =1

the Hamiltonian constraint becomes

                                      Π2β − Π2φ + λ2s V (β, φ) e−2 φ = 0 ,                                         (9.7)

and its differential implementation in the minisuperspace spanned by β and φ finally leads
to the WDW equation for the gravidilaton system:
                               h                                           i
                                   ∂φ2 − ∂β2 + λ2s V (β, φ) e−2φ               Ψ(β, φ) = 0.                        (9.8)

    It is important to stress that such an equation is manifestly free from operator-ordering
problems, as the Hamiltonian (9.7) has a flat metric in momentum space. This is not a
special feature of the case we have considered because, thanks to the duality symmetry of
the string effective action, the associated WDW minisuperspace is globally flat, and we can
always choose a convenient parametrization leading to a flat minisuperspace metric.
   For a more general discussion of this point we may add to the effective action (9.1) a
non-trivial antisymmetric tensor background, Bµν 6= 0. The kinetic part of the action may
then be written in compact form as [310, 410] (see Subsection 2.3):
                                             Z                                              
                                        λs               ˙ 2 + 1 Tr Ṁ (M −1 )˙ ,
                              S=−                 dte−φ (φ)                                                        (9.9)
                                        2                      8
where N = 1, and M is a symmetric 2d × 2d matrix, including the spatial part of the
background fields, G ≡ gij , B ≡ Bij , and already defined in Eq. (2.55). We recall that
this action is invariant under global O(d, d) transformations that leave the shifted dilaton
invariant,
                                φ → φ,         M → ΩT M Ω,                            (9.10)

                                                               200
where                                                                           
                                                                         0   I
                                 ΩT ηΩ = η,                     η=                   .   (9.11)
                                                                         I   0
The Hamiltonian associated to torsion-graviton background,
                              4
                       H=        Tr (M ΠM M ΠM ),                        ΠM = δS/δṀ ,   (9.12)
                              λs
would seem to have ordering problems, because [M, ΠM ] 6= 0. However, thanks to the
O(d, d) properties of M ,
                                    M ηM = η,                                (9.13)
we can always rewrite the kinetic part of the action in terms of the flat O(d, d) metric η:

                                      Tr Ṁ (M −1 )˙ = Tr (Ṁ η)2 .                      (9.14)

The corresponding Hamiltonian
                                                    4
                                      H=−              Tr (ηΠM ηΠM )                     (9.15)
                                                    λs
has a flat metric in momentum space, with no ordering problems for the corresponding
WDW equation [310, 410]:
                   "                                                       #
                       δ2                δ   δ
                            2 + 8Tr   η    η                + λ2s V e−2φ Ψ(M, φ) = 0.    (9.16)
                       δφ               δM δM

    On the other hand, if we insist on adopting a curvilinear parametrization of the minisu-
perspace, the ordering fixed by the duality symmetry is exactly the same as the ordering
imposed by the requirement of reparametrization invariance, as there are no contributions
to the ordered Hamiltonian from the scalar curvature of minisuperspace [36], because min-
isuperspace is globally flat.
    To illustrate this point we may consider the pair of minisuperspace coordinates {a, φ},
different from the previous pair {β, φ} used in Eq. (9.4). The kinetic part of the action
(9.1) then leads to the (kinetic part of the) Hamiltonian

                                          a2 2
                                  H=        Π − Π2φ ≡ γ AB ΠA ΠB ,                       (9.17)
                                          d a
where                                              
                                               δS                    ȧ −φ
                                  Πa =                      = dλs       e ,              (9.18)
                                               δa    N =1            a2
corresponding to the non-trivial 2 × 2 metric:
                                                                        
                                                     d
                                          γAB = diag    , −1 .                           (9.19)
                                                     a2


                                                        201
The quantum operator associated to the Hamiltonian (9.17) has to be ordered, because
[a, Πa ] 6= 0, and its differential representation can be written in general as
                                                             !
                                    ∂2  1  2 ∂
                                               2     ∂
                              H=    2 − d a ∂a2 + ǫa ∂a          ,                      (9.20)
                                 ∂φ
where ǫ is a c-number parameter depending on the ordering. Note that there are no contri-
butions to the ordered Hamiltonian from the minisuperspace scalar curvature [36], which is
vanishing for the metric (9.19).
   Reparametrization invariance now imposes on the Hamiltonian the covariant d’Alembert
form
                                          1       √
                       H = −∇A ∇A = − √ ∂A ( −γγ AB ∂B ),                         (9.21)
                                          −γ
and consequently fixes ǫ = 1. The kinetic part of the action (9.4), on the other hand, is
invariant under the T -duality transformation [599, 580]

                                  e = a−1 ,
                                a→a                   φ → φ,                            (9.22)

which implies, for the Hamiltonian (9.20),
                                             2         ∂
                                         e) + (ǫ − 1)a
                                H(a) = H(a           e .                                (9.23)
                                             d         ∂a
                                                        e
The invariance of the Hamiltonian requires ǫ = 1, and thus fixes the same quantum order-
ing as the condition of general covariance in minisuperspace. A similar relation between
quantum ordering and duality symmetry can be easily established for more general effective
actions, including a larger class of non-minimal gravidilaton couplings [434, 435].


9.2   Wave scattering in minisuperspace

In the absence of dilaton potential, the WDW equation (9.8) reduces to the free d’Alembert
equation and provides a plane-wave representation in minisuperspace of the different asymp-
totic branches of the classical solutions.
   Let us recall, in fact, that the solutions of the low-energy effective action (9.4) always
contain four branches. For V = 0, in particular, we have four (physically different) solutions,
                                         √
                       a(t) = (∓t)∓1/ d ,            φ(t) = − ln(∓t),                   (9.24)

related by the duality transformation (9.22) and by time reversal, t → −t. They satisfy the
condition                       √
                                  dH ≡ β̇ = ±(∓t)−1 = ±φ, ˙                          (9.25)
                                                                  ˙ β̇}, corresponding to
and may thus be represented as the bisecting lines of the plane {φ,

   • expansion → β̇ > 0,

                                             202
                                                     •

                         expanding                                   expanding
                         post-big bang                               pre-big bang




                                                T+t
                                                                                    •
                                           T              T

                                                T+t



                         contracting                                 contracting
                         post-big bang                               pre-big bang



Figure 9.1: The four branches of the lowest-order string-cosmology solutions, with (hyper-
bolas) and without (bisecting lines) a positive cosmological constant Λ. The dashed curves
represent the quantum transition from a pre- to a post-big bang configuration.

   • contraction → β̇ < 0,

   • pre-big bang (growing dilaton) → φ˙ > 0,

   • post-big bang (decreasing dilaton) → φ˙ < 0,

as illustrated in Fig. 9.1. We may note, for later use, that if we add to the action a positive
cosmological constant (V = Λ), then the classical solutions are represented in the plane
 ˙ β̇} by the hyperbolas
{φ,                                         √
                                    φ˙ 2 − ( dH)2 = Λ.                                  (9.26)
In that case, the initial configuration is shifted to a state with flat metric and linearly
evolving dilaton, but the solution is still characterized by four branches coinciding, asymp-
totically, with the free configurations of Eq. (9.24).
    The V = 0 solutions of the WDW equations, on the other hand, can be factorized in
the form of plane waves representing free energy and momentum eigenstates:
                                               (±)       (±)
                               Ψ(β, φ) ∼ ψβ ψφ                 ∼ e±ikβ±ikφ ,              (9.27)

where (k > 0):
                            (±)          (±)                        (±)             (±)
                      Πβ ψβ       = ±k ψβ ,                    Πφ ψφ      = ±k ψφ .       (9.28)

By recalling that Πβ ∼ β̇, Πφ ∼ −φ˙ (see Eq. (9.6)), the above plane waves represent the
four branches of Eq. (9.24), defined by Πβ = ±Πφ , with the following correspondence:

                                                 203
                      (+)
   • expansion → ψβ ,
                       (−)
   • contraction → ψβ ,
                                               (−)
   • pre-big bang (growing dilaton) → ψφ ,

                                                     (+)
   • post-big bang (decreasing dilaton) → ψφ .

    For an isotropic, low-energy solution [599], the dilaton is growing (φ̇ > 0) only if the met-
ric is expanding (β̇ > 0), see Eq. (9.3). If we impose, as our physical boundary condition,
that the Universe emerge from the string perturbative vacuum (corresponding, asymptoti-
cally, to β → −∞, φ → −∞), then the initial state Ψin must represent a configuration with
                                                                         (+) (−)
positive eigenvalue of Πβ and opposite eigenvalue of Πφ , i.e. Ψin ∼ ψβ ψφ (see also [189]
for a detailed discussion of boundary conditions in quantum-string cosmology).
    A quantum transition from pre- to post-big bang thus becomes, in this representation,
a transition from an initial state

                            Ψin ∼ eikφ−ikβ ,         Πβ > 0,    Πφ < 0,                   (9.29)

to a final state
                        Ψout ∼ e−ikφ−ikβ ,            Πβ > 0,    Πφ > 0                   (9.30)
(see the dashed curves of Fig. 9.1). The associated trajectory describes a monotonic
evolution along β, and a reflection along φ. The above discussion suggests that we look
at the quantum evolution (in minisuperspace) of the initial pre-big bang state as at the
scattering, induced by an effective WDW potential, of an incoming wave travelling from
−∞ along the positive direction of the axes β and φ.
    The effective potential, on the other hand, is known to be strongly suppressed as we ap-
proach the string perturbative vacuum, β, φ → −∞. We shall assume that a possible growth
of V in the strong-coupling regime is not strong enough to prevent the effective WDW po-
tential from going to zero also at large positive values of β and φ, so that V exp(−2φ) → 0
for β, φ → ±∞. It follows that also the final asymptotic configuration Ψout can be repre-
                                  (±)   (±)
sented by the free eigenstates ψβ , ψφ . However, even if the initial state is fixed by the
boundary conditions of the pre-big bang scenario, the final state is not, and there are in gen-
eral four different types of evolution [282], depending on whether the asymptotic outgoing
state Ψout is a superposition of waves with the same Πβ and opposite Πφ , or with the same
Πφ and opposite Πβ , and also depending on the identification of the time-like coordinate in
minisuperspace [152, 154].
   These four possibilities are illustrated in Fig. 9.2, where cases (a) and (b) correspond
           (+) (±)                                                   (−) (±)
to Ψ±                                                         ±
    out ∼ ψβ ψφ , while cases (c) and (d) correspond to Ψout ∼ ψφ ψβ . Also, in cases
(a) and (d) the time-like coordinate is identified with β, in cases (b) and (c) with φ. It


                                                 204
                   ( )   ( )    =t       ( )   ( )
                                                                           =x     ( )     ( )




                                               =x                                       =t

                  ( )    ( )                                   ( )   ( )         ( )     ( )



                               (a)                                         (b)


                                =x       ( )    ( )
                                                               ( )   ( )   =t      ( )     ( )




                                               =t                                        =x

                  ( )    ( )            ( )    ( )             ( )   ( )



                               (c)                                         (d)


Figure 9.2: Four different classes of scattering processes for the incoming wave function
representing the string perturbative vacuum (straight, solid line). The outgoing state is
represented by a mixture of positive and negative eigenfunctions of Πβ and Πφ .


must be noted that cases (c) and (d) require a duality-breaking dilaton potential, otherwise
[H, Πβ ] = 0, and then a reflection along the β axis is impossible, even at the quantum level
[310].
    The two cases (a) and (c) represent scattering and reflection along the spacelike axes φ
and β, respectively. In case (a) the evolution along β is monotonic, so that the Universe
always keeps expanding. The incident wave is partially transmitted towards the pre-big bang
singularity (unbounded growth of the curvature and of the dilaton, β → +∞, φ → +∞), and
partially reflected back towards the low-energy, expanding, post-big bang regime (β → +∞,
φ → −∞) [310]. In case (c) the evolution is monotonic along the time axis φ, but not along
β. The incident wave is therefore totally transmitted towards the singularity (φ → +∞),
but in part as an expanding configuration and in part as a contracting one3 .
    The other two cases, (b) and (d), are qualitatively different, as the final state is a
superposition of positive and negative energy eigenstates, i.e. of modes of positive and
negative frequency with respect to the time axes chosen in minisuperspace. In the language
of third quantization [542, 421, 357, 358, 359] (i.e. second quantization of the WDW wave
function in superspace) they represent a “Bogoliubov mixing”, describing the production
  3
      R. Ricci, M. Gasperini and G. Veneziano (1996), unpublished.


                                                      205
of pairs of universes from the vacuum. The mode moving backwards in time has to be “re-
interpreted”, as in quantum field theory, as an “antiuniverse” of positive energy and opposite
momentum (in superspace). Since the inversion of momentum, in superspace, corresponds
to a reflection of β̇, the re-interpretation principle in this context changes expansion into
contraction, and vice versa.
     Case (b), in particular, describes the production of universe–antiuniverse pairs –one
expanding, the other contracting– from the string perturbative vacuum [130]. The pairs
evolve towards the strong-coupling regime φ → +∞, so that both members of the pair
fall inside the pre-big bang singularity. Case (d) is more interesting, in our context, since
there the universe and the antiuniverse of the pair are both expanding: one falls inside the
pre-big bang singularity, the other expands towards the low-energy, post-big bang regime,
and may expand to infinity, representing the birth of a Universe like ours in a standard
Friedmann-like configuration [290].
    Possible explicit examples of a quantum representation in minisuperspace of the tran-
sition from pre- to post-big bang, based on the above scattering processes, will be given in
the next two subsections.


9.3   Birth of the Universe as “quantum reflection”

The simplest way to represent the transition from the string perturbative vacuum to the
present, post-big bang regime, is to identify the time-like coordinate in the minisuperspace
with β, and to represent the process as a reflection of the incoming wave function along
the space-like coordinate φ, according to Eqs. (9.29), (9.30) (case (a) of Fig. 9.2). The
transition probability is thus controlled by the reflection coefficient
                                             (−)
                                           |Ψ−∞ (β, φ)|2
                                    Rk =     (+)
                                                           ,                           (9.31)
                                           |Ψ−∞ (β, φ)|2
         (±)
where Ψ−∞ are the asymptotic components of the WDW wave function at φ → −∞,
containing the left-moving (−) and right-moving (+) part of the wave along φ (see [152] for
a rigorous definition of scalar products in the appropriate Hilbert space, and [154, 155, 339]
for a path-integral approach to the computation of the transition amplitudes).
    Without potential in the WDW equation there is no transition, of course (in the absence
of a dilaton potential, the possible decoherence of the quantum-cosmological system, and
its implications for the exit problem, have been discussed in [454]). With an appropriate
potential, allowing a smooth classical evolution from pre- to post-big bang, the transition
probability R tends to unity; R may be non-zero, however, even if the two branches of the
classical solution are causally disconnected by a singularity.
   An instructive example, to this purpose, is provided by the duality-symmetric (non-


                                             206
local) four-loop dilaton potential

                   V± (βφ) = ±V0 e4φ ,                    V0 = const,         V0 > 0,               (9.32)

already introduced in Subsection 8.1 (for generalized exponential potential, with the in-
clusion of the antisymmetric tensor contribution to the WDW equation, see [467]). The
corresponding action (9.4), in d = 3, has the following classical solution [310]
                                                                                        √
                                    !                                           !1/2 1/     3
            1   k2 t2 λ2s V0                            k2 t            k 4 t2
       φ = − ln      ∓ 2                ,      a = a0 2 √ +                    ∓1               ,   (9.33)
            2    λ2s   k                              λs V0             λ4s V0

where a0 is an integration constant, and
                                       √ Z
                                  −φ     3     √
                        k = λs β̇e = 2     d3 x −ge−φ β̇ = const                                    (9.34)
                                       λs
is the conserved momentum along the β axis.
    For V < 0, Eq. (9.33) describes a regular “self-dual” solution –satisfying a(t)/a0 =
a0 /a(−t)– characterized by a “bell-like” shape of the curvature scale and of the coupling
eφ (see Subsection 8.1). The solutions of the WDW equation (9.8), in the small coupling
regime φ → −∞, can be written as [310]
                                           √ !ik −ik(β−φ)         √ !−ik −ik(β+φ) 
                              Nπ     
                                        λ s   V 0  e            λ s V0      e         
     lim Ψk (φ, β) = −                                      −
    φ→−∞                  2 sin(ikπ)        2     Γ(1 + ik)        2        Γ(1 − ik)
                              (+)    (−)             (+)    (+)
                     = Ak ψβ ψφ              + Bk ψβ ψφ                                             (9.35)

(N is a normalization coefficient), and contain the superposition of the initial string per-
turbative vacuum and of the reflected component, representing the post-big bang regime.
Clearly, R = 1 for all k, as the two branches of the solution are smoothly connected already
at the classical level.
    For V > 0, on the contrary, the pre- and post-big bang branches are disconnected by an
                                         √
unphysical region, of extension |t| < λ2s V0 /k2 , where the expansion rate β̇ and the dilaton
coupling eφ become imaginary. Such a region is bounded, on both sides, by a curvature
singularity. However, after fixing the boundary conditions with the string perturbative
vacuum and in the small coupling regime, the solutions of the WDW equation can be
written as [310]:
                                            √ !ik −ik(β−φ)           √ !−ik −ik(β+φ) 
                                           λs V0      e             λs V0        e
   lim Ψk (φ, β) = iN csc(ikπ) ekπ                              −                         
  φ→−∞                                        2       Γ(1  + ik)       2         Γ(1 − ik)
                             (+)    (−)             (+)    (+)
                   = Ak ψβ ψφ               + Bk ψβ ψφ .                                            (9.36)

The reflection coefficient
                                                     (−)
                                                   |Ψ−∞ |2
                                            Rk =     (+)
                                                             = e−2πk                                (9.37)
                                                   |Ψ−∞ |2

                                                      207
is exponentially suppressed but non-zero, corresponding to a non-vanishing transition prob-
ability from the pre- to the post-big bang branches of the above solution.
   Exactly the same result (9.37) is obtained for the simplest case of dilaton potential,
a positive cosmological constant V (β, φ) = Λ. In that case, by expressing the conserved
momentum k in terms of the coupling gs = eφs /2 at the string scale Hs = λ−1
                                                                          s , the transition
probability between the left and right branches of the hyperbolas of Fig. 9.1, for a three-
dimensional portion of space of fixed proper volume Ωi at t → −∞, can be written in the
form [322]:
                                   √        " √                √ 
                                                        1/2 # 3 
                                      12π Ωi     3    3
              R(Λ, Ωi , gs ) = exp − 2         √ + 1+ 2              ,                   (9.38)
                                    gs λ3s λs Λ     λs Λ          

Unfortunately, such a transition probability is exponentially suppressed, unless the proper
size of the transition volume is small, and the cosmological constant is large, in string units.
Note, however, that the probability is peaked in the string coupling regime, with a typical
“instantonic” behaviour R ∼ exp(−1/gs2 ): this means that the Universe tends to emerge
from the transition in the coupling regime appropriate to the present post-big bang phase.
    It is important to stress that the quantum-transition probabilities (9.37), (9.38) have a
conceptual meaning different from similar results obtained in the context of the standard
inflationary scenario. In string cosmology, in fact, the quantum (Planckian) regime is
reached at the end of the pre-big bang phase, when the Universe is expected to exit from
(not to enter in) the inflationary regime. Thus, quantum effects are not responsible for
inflationary initial conditions [286], whereas they are in the standard inflationary scenario
[394]. In spite of this important difference, the result (9.37) is formally very similar to
the probability that our Universe may emerge from the Planckian regime obtained in the
context of the “tunnelling from nothing” and other similar inflationary scenarios [9, 609,
440, 633, 541], where the probability is also exponentially suppressed, and the coefficient
k is inversely proportional to the effective cosmological constant and to the gravitational
coupling, P ∼ exp(−1/λ2P Λ).
   The reason for this formal analogy is easy to understand if we recall that, by choosing
the string perturbative vacuum as the initial state of the pre-big bang scenario, it follows
that in minisuperspace there are only right-moving waves approaching the singularity at
φ → +∞. This is exactly equivalent to imposing tunnelling boundary conditions that select
only outgoing modes at the singular space-time boundary [610, 611].
   In this sense, the quantum reflection illustrated in this subsection can also be interpreted
as a tunnelling process, not “from nothing”, however, but “from the string perturbative
vacuum”. A different minisuperspace representation of the birth of the Universe from the
vacuum will be illustrated in the next subsection.




                                              208
9.4   Birth of the Universe as “antitunnelling”

The process of quantum reflection (or tunnelling) is not the only “channel” open to vacuum
decay in the string cosmology minisuperspace introduced in the previous subsections. There
are also other –in principle more efficient– processes, such as the parametric amplification of
the WDW wave function, which could represent the transition to our present cosmological
state. We refer, in particular, to the cases (b) and (d) illustrated in Fig. 9.2.
    Case (b), discussed in [130], shows indeed that a primordial conversion of expanding
into contracting dimensions, corresponding to the production of pairs of Universes from the
vacuum, can be efficiently described as the parametric amplification of the wave function.
In this subsection we shall report a particular, explicit example of case (d) [290] to show
that, with an appropriate model of dilaton potential, the parametric amplification of the
wave function can also efficiently represent the transition from the pre- to the post-big bang
regime, via pair production from the vacuum. In that case, the birth of the Universe can be
described as a process of “antitunnelling from the string perturbative vacuum” (the term
“antitunnelling”, synonymous of parametric amplification, follows from the fact that the
transition probability in that case is controlled by the inverse of the quantum-mechanical
transmission coefficient, see Subsection 4.4).
    First of all we note that, with a duality-invariant dilaton potential, the string-cosmology
Hamiltonian is translationally invariant along the β axis: in that case, the initial expanding
pre-big bang configuration keeps expanding, and the out state cannot be a mixture of states
with positive and negative eigenvalues of Πβ . To implement the process (d) of Fig. 9.2,
we thus need a non-local, duality-breaking potential, which contains both the metric and
the dilaton, but not in the combination φ. We shall use, in particular, a two-loop dilaton
potential induced by an effective cosmological constant Λ (two-loop potentials are known
to favour the transition to the post-big bang regime already at the classical level [319, 122],
but only for appropriate repulsive self-interactions, Λ < 0). We shall assume, in addition,
that such a potential is rapidly damped in the large-radius limit β → +∞, and we shall
approximate such a damping, for simplicity, by the Heaviside step function θ, by setting

                             V = Λθ(−β)e2φ ,              Λ > 0.                        (9.39)

With such a damping we represent the effective suppression of the cosmological constant,
required for the transition to a realistic post-big bang configuration.
    Given the above potential, the general solution of the WDW equation can be factorized
in terms of the eigenstates of the momentum Πφ , by setting
                                      h                         √   i
       Ψ(β, φ) = Ψk (β)eikφ ,          ∂β2 + k2 − λ2s Λ θ(−β) e2 dβ Ψk (β) = 0.         (9.40)

In the region β > 0 the potential is vanishing, and the outgoing solution is a superposition
of eigenstates of Πβ corresponding to positive and negative frequency modes ψβ± , as in case

                                             209
(d) of Fig. 9.2. In the region β < 0 the solution is a combination of Bessel functions Jν (z),
                               √                         p      √
                                                                  dβ
of imaginary index ν = ±ik/ d and argument z = iλs Λ/d e             . If we fix the boundary
conditions at β → −∞, by imposing that the Universe starts expanding from the string
perturbative vacuum,
                               Ψin = lim Ψ(β, φ) ∼ eik(φ−β) ,                           (9.41)
                                         β→−∞

then the WDW wave function is uniquely determined as:
                                         s               
                                               Λ √dβ  ikφ
               Ψ(β, φ) = Nk J− √ik iλs          e    e ,            β < 0,
                                 d             d
                        h                                  i
                     = A+ (k)e−ikβ + A− (k)eikβ eikφ ,               β > 0.            (9.42)

With the matching conditions at β = 0 we can finally compute the Bogoliubov coefficients
|c± (k)|2 = |A± (k)|2 /|Nk |2 determining, in the third quantization formalism, the number
nk of universes produced from the vacuum, for each mode k (where k represents a given
configuration in the space of the initial parameters).
    As shown by an explicit computation [130, 290], the wave function is parametrically
                                          √
amplified (i.e. nk ≫ 1), for all k < λs Λ. In that case, the birth of our present post-
big bang Universe may proceed efficiently, and may be represented in minisuperspace as
the forced production of pairs of Universes from the quantum fluctuations of the string
perturbative vacuum. However, for a realistic process occurring at the string scale, with
β̇ ∼ λs and eφ/2 ∼ gs , the condition of parametric amplification can be written as
                                                             √
                                              Ω3        1
                                     k∼                    < λs Λ,
                                                           ∼                           (9.43)
                                              λ3s        2
                                                        gs
               R
where Ω3 = a3 d3 x is the proper spatial volume emerging from the transition in the post-
big bang regime. This implies that the transition is strongly favoured for configurations of
small enough spatial volume in string units, large enough coupling gs , and/or large enough
cosmological constant Λ (in string units), just as in the cases discussed in the previous
subsection.
                 √
    For k ≫ λs Λ the wave function does not “hit” the barrier, there is no parametric
amplification, and the inital state runs almost undisturbed towards the singularity. Only
a small, exponentially suppressed fraction is able to emerge in the post-big bang regime,
exactly as in the case of tunnelling (or quantum reflection). In the context of third quan-
tization, this process can still be described as the production of pairs of universes, but the
                                                                    √
number of pairs is now exponentially damped, nk ∼ exp(−k/λs Λ), with a Boltzmann
                                                                                           √
factor corresponding to a “thermal bath” of universes, at the effective temperature T ∼ Λ
in superspace.
    It seems possible to conclude, therefore, that the low-energy quantum-cosmology pro-
cesses considered in this subsection may allow a quantum transition from pre- to post-big


                                                    210
bang configurations, even if such configurations are classically disconnected. With a “re-
alistic” dilaton potential, the “bubbles” of post-big bang phase nucleated out of the string
perturbative vacuum seem, however, to be too small to reproduce our present Universe with-
out a further long period of post-big bang inflation. The quantum processes reported in this
Section, however, could explain the “foam” of infinitely many “baby Universes” required,
for instance, in the context of chaotic inflation [442] and of other, standard, inflationary
scenarios.


10     Conclusion

In this last section we will conclude our report by discussing a possible “late-time” conse-
quence of the pre-big bang scenario –the large-scale dominance of the dilatonic dark energy
density– and by presenting a list of various problems and aspects of such a scenario that
are not included in the previous sections. Finally, we will summarize our personal outlook
of string cosmology, together with some speculations about its possible future perspectives.


10.1    Towards the future: a dilaton-dominated Universe?

The dilaton is, undoubtedly, one of the most important ingredients of the pre-big bang sce-
nario illustrated in this paper. Indeed, the dilaton implements the duality symmetry, con-
trols the strength of all interactions, sustains the initial inflationary evolution, contributes
to the amplification of the quantum fluctuations (and, in particular, to the production of
seeds for the magnetic fields), leading eventually to the formation of a cosmic background
of massive scalar particles. All such effects are typical of string cosmology and represent the
“imprint” of the pre-big bang scenario with respect to other, more conventional, inflationary
scenarios.
    Not satisfied with all such effects, however, the dilaton could still be hale and hearty,
and still in action even today, so that it would affect in a determinant way not only the very
early cosmological past, but also the present (and, possibly, future) state of our Universe.
The dilaton potential energy, or a mixture of kinetic and potential energy density, could
represent in fact the dark component responsible for the cosmic acceleration observed very
recently [535, 516]. In this sense, string theory can automatically provide, with the dilaton,
a “non-minimal” model of quintessence [293, 311] (i.e. a model of quintessence based on a
scalar field non-minimally coupled to gravity and to elementary matter fields).
    There are, basically, two possible scenarios, depending on the (currently uncertain)
shape of the non-perturbative dilaton potential V (φ). In the context of superstring models
for grand-unified theories (GUTs), the present value of the dilaton should determine in fact
the whole set of gravitational and gauge coupling parameters, which are today constant
(or, if they are time-dependent, are nevertheless running very slowly on a cosmological time


                                              211
scale). This constraint can be implemented in two ways.
     The first possibility is a dilaton almost frozen at a minimum of the potential, in the
moderate-coupling regime with −φ of order 1, in such a way that the GUT gauge coupling
is fixed to [403]
                             αGUT ∼ (Ms /MP )2 ∼ eφ ∼ 0.1 − 0.01.                    (10.1)
The second possibility is a dilaton monotonically running towards +∞, and the couplings
saturated at small values in the strong-coupling regime because of the large number N
of fields entering the loop corrections, or the large value of the quadratic Casimir C for
unification gauge groups like E8 . Realistic values of αGUT and Ms can be obtained at
φ ≫ 1, for N ∼ C ∼ 102 , typically as [606, 607]:

                                    eφ                   Ms      eφ
                      αGUT ∼             ,                  ∼          .              (10.2)
                                 1 + Ceφ                 MP   1 + N eφ

    In both cases, if the present value V0 ≡ V (φ0 ) of the potential is of the order of the
present Hubble scale H02 (and, possibly, φ̇2 ∼ V0 ), the dilaton can reproduce the observed
“dark-energy” effects, playing the role of the so-called “quintessence” [138]. The required
fine-tuning of the amplitude of the potential (and the corresponding ultra-light value of the
dilaton mass, m ∼ H0 ), seems to be unavoidable. In this context, however, it seems pos-
sible to alleviate the problem of the “cosmic coincidence” [572], generated by the observed
(approximate) equality V0 ∼ ρ0 , where ρ0 is the present energy density of the dominant
dark-matter component. Let us explain how this could happen, in both the weak-coupling
and the strong-coupling scenarios of dilatonic quintessence.
    In the first case we note that, even assuming that the dilaton gets frozen at a value φ0
after the transition to the post-big bang regime, with a potential energy that is initially
negligible (V0 ≪ Heq  2 ), it may keep frozen for the whole duration of the radiation epoch,

but it tends to be shifted away from equilibrium as soon as the Universe enters the matter-
dominated regime.
   Suppose in fact that we add a potential V (φ) to the low-energy gravidilaton action:
                                 Z      q        h                 i
                           1
                   S=−               d4 x |g| e−φ R + (∇φ)2 + V (φ) + Sm ,            (10.3)
                          2λ2s

where Sm describes, for simplicity, perfect-fluid sources minimally coupled to the back-
ground. For a homogeneous and conformally flat metric, the dilaton equation can then be
written in the form
                                          1
                        φ̈ + 3H φ̇ − φ̇2 + eφ (ρ − 3p) + V ′ + V = 0.                 (10.4)
                                          2
Combining this equation with the standard conservation equation of the matter sources,

                                        ρ̇ + 3H(ρ + p) = 0,                           (10.5)

                                               212
it follows that constant and stable solutions φ = φ0 (with φ̇ = 0 = φ̈) are allowed in three
cases only: 1) vacuum, ρ = p = 0, V + V ′ = 0; 2) cosmological constant, ρ = −p = ρ0 =
const, V + V ′ = −2eφ0 ρ0 = const; 3) radiation, ρ = 3p, V + V ′ = 0.
    So, even if the dilaton is “sleeping” in the radiation era, it “wakes up” and starts rolling
away from the freezing position determined by V + V ′ = 0 just after the equilibrium epoch.
We are thus led to the following question: For which values of the potential V0 may the
dilaton bounce back to the minimum, and the matter era be followed by a quintessential,
potential-dominated epoch?
     If the answer would point only and precisely at V0 ∼ H02 , then the cosmic coincidence
would be explained. If the answer would indicate for V0 a restricted range of values, including
H02 , the coincidence problem would remain, but it would be alleviated.
    The answer to the above question depends on the shape of the potential, and on the
effective strength of the dilaton coupling to macroscopic matter. To illustrate this point
we may consider the E-frame cosmological equations (6.2), obtained from the action (10.3)
through the conformal transformation

             geµν = gµν e−φ ,        φe = φ,   Ve = eφ V,       ρe = ρe2φ ,   pe = pe2φ .   (10.6)

In units of 16πG = 1 (and omitting the tilde, for simplicity), the dilaton equation becomes
                                            1
                                φ̈ + 3H φ̇ + α(φ)(ρ − 3p) + V ′ = 0,                        (10.7)
                                            2
where we have taken into account, through the coupling function α(φ), a possible loop
renormalization of the effective dilaton coupling in the matter action. In the radiation era,
ρ = 3p and a stable, frozen dilaton (φ̇ = 0) thus corresponds to an extremum of the E-frame
potential, V ′ = 0. In the matter era, when p = 0, there is a dilaton acceleration away from
the minimum, φ̈ = −αρ/2, possibly contrasted by the restoring force −V ′ .
    Consider now a typical, supersymmetry-breaking dilaton potential, instantonically sup-
pressed [89] at φ → −∞, with a non-trivial structure developing a minimum in the region
of moderate coupling, and exponentially growing at φ → +∞ because of the conformal
transformation to the E-frame. A “minimal” example of such a potential can be simply
parametrized (in the E-frame) as follows [398]
                                 h                          i
                     V = m2 ek1 (φ− φ1 ) + βe−k2 (φ− φ1 ) e−ǫ exp[−γ(φ− φ1 )] ,             (10.8)

where k1 , k2 , φ1 , ǫ, β, γ are dimensionless numbers of order 1 For an illustrative purpose we
will choose here the particular values k1 = k2 = β = γ = 1, ǫ = 0.1, φ1 = −3, in such a way
that the minimum is at φ0 = −3.112..., and that gs2 = exp(φ0 ) ≃ 0.045, in agreement with
Eq. (10.1).
    With the above choice of parameters, the dilaton potential is plotted in Fig. 10.1 for
different values of m. It is important to note that the extremum φ0 is not separated from

                                                 213
                              0.08      V                        m1

                              0.06
                                                                 m2
                              0.04                               m3

                              0.02
                                                                  φ
                           -10              -6      -4     -2


Figure 10.1: Plot of V (φ) from Eq. (10.8), with k1 = k2 = β = γ = 1, ǫ = 0.1, φ1 = −3.
The three curves, from top to bottom, correspond respectively to m = 1/10, 1/12, 1/15 in
units of MP2 = 2.


the perturbative regime (φ → −∞) by an infinite potential barrier, and that the lower
V0 ∼ m2 , the lower the barrier, the weaker is the restoring force −V ′ and the easier it is for
the dilaton to escape from the minimum and run to −∞.
    To match present phenomenology, the value of V0 , in such a context, has to be chosen
very small in string units, V0 ∼ H02 ∼ (10−33 eV)2 (see below for a possible justification).
It follows that the potential barrier is very low, and the dilaton would certainly escape
from the minimum at the beginning of the matter era, unless the coupling to matter (αρ/2)
is also correspondingly small. Such a coupling, on the other hand, has to be very small,
because the corresponding scalar force has a very long range, V ′′ (φ0 ) ∼ m2 ∼ V0 ∼ H02 ,
and the dilaton must be strongly decoupled (α ≪ 1, at least today) to avoid unacceptable
violations of the equivalence principle [197, 198].
    It can be shown, as a consequence, that the present values of α allowed by the gravita-
tional phenomenology (α0 ∼ < 10−3 ) are compatible with a late cosmological phase dominated
by the dilaton potential only for a restricted range of V0 , which depends on the value of
α at the equilibrium epoch, αeq [293]. Expanding α(φ) around the minimum, and starting
from αeq = 0.1, for instance, a numerical analysis shows that the dilaton, after a small shift
at the equilibrium epoch, bounces back to the minimum provided 10−7 Heq ∼       < m∼   < Heq ,
                                          1/2
which includes the realistic case m ∼ V0 ∼ H0 ∼ 10−6 Heq . In such a context, therefore,
the coincidence problem is not strictly solved, but possibly alleviated (see [293] for a more
detailed discussion).
    An alternative scenario for a dilatonic interpretation of the observed “quintessential”
effects, is based on the assumption that the dilaton never gets trapped in a minimum, and
evolves monotonically (and boundlessly) from negative (pre-big bang) to positive (post-big
bang) values, with a potential smoothly approaching zero as φ → +∞ (see Fig. 2.1). The
non-perturbative potential, in this context, is typically characterized by a bell-like shape,


                                              214
which can be parametrized (in the S-frame) as [311]:
                                                                         
                                   2       − β1 exp(−φ)    − β1 exp(−φ)
                           V =m            e   1          −e   2              ,        (10.9)

where β1 > β2 > 0 are dimensionless numbers of order unity and, again, the mass scale m
satisfies m ≪ Heq , to avoid that the dilaton becomes dominant too early.
    As before, the potential is instantonically suppressed at φ → −∞, but now is also
esponentially suppressed in the φ → +∞ limit. The mass scale m, in the contexth    of a inon-
                                                                                   −1
perturbative potential, is naturally related to the string scale by m ∼ exp −βαGUT Ms ,
where β is a model-dependent parameter of order 1. This may explain the smallness of the
potential in string units, but it should not hide the fact that the constant parameter β has
to be precisely adjusted ad hoc if we want to start the accelerated dilaton-dominated phase
not much earlier than at redshifts of order one [587], and not later than today.
    In the context of a running-dilaton scenario, the gauge couplings and the ratio Ms /MP
are to be stabilized, in the φ → +∞ limit, by the loop corrections. Such corrections, on
the other hand, also play a fundamental role in determining the effective dilatonic charge of
the elementary fields appearing in the matter action. Thanks to this interplay, a dilatonic
charge that switches on at late times, in the (non-baryonic) dark-matter sector, seems able
to provide a possible dynamical explanation of the cosmic coincidence [311] (see [195, 196]
for possible related violations of free-fall universality, and time variation of the natural
constants, induced in this context).
    Such a dynamical approach to the coincidence problem is based, in particular, on the
following loop-corrected action
               Z           h                                 i
        1              √
    S=− 2          d4 x −g e−ψ(φ) R + Z(φ) (∇φ)2 + 2λ2s V (φ) + Sm (φ, matter),      (10.10)
       2λs
where V is the potential of Eq. (10.9), and the loop form factors ψ and Z, in a minimal
“induced-gravity” scenario, are assumed to be parametrized at large φ as follows [606, 607]:

                       e−ψ(φ) = e−φ + c21 ,                Z(φ) = e−φ − c22 ,        (10.11)

where c21 ∼ c22 ∼ 102 , in agreement with Eq. (10.2). We also assume that the action Sm
contains non-baryonic dark-matter whose dilatonic charge density per unit of gravitational
mass, σd /ρd , switches on as φ → +∞, and can be parametrized as [311]:

                                  σd      2  δSm        eq0 φ
                         q(φ) =      = −√        = q0 2        ,                     (10.12)
                                  ρd     −gρd δφ     c + eq0 φ

where, again, c2 ∼ 102 . Note that we are using here a definition of dilatonic charge density
different from the one previously introduced in Eqs. (6.16) and (8.41).
   The analytical and numerical study of such a model shows that, in a way that is largely
independent from the initial conditions, the Universe is eventually driven to an asymptotic

                                                   215
accelerated regime characterized by a frozen ratio between the dark-matter and the dilatonic
energy density, ρd /ρφ = const. The present approximate equality of ρd and V0 is no longer
a coincidence, in this context, but a dynamical property of the asymptotic configuration,
as in models of “coupled quintessence” [373, 26].
     For a better illustration of the “late-time” post-big bang scenario, described by Eqs.
(10.10)–(10.12), it is convenient to consider the E-frame cosmological equations for the
tilted variables defined through the conformal transformation

          eeψ/2 ,
   a = c1 a                      e ψ/2 ,
                        dt = c1 dte        ρe = c21 ρe2ψ ,    pe = c21 pe2ψ ,   e = c21 σe2ψ
                                                                                σ              (10.13)

(we are considering, as before, perfect-fluid sources evolving in a conformally flat metric
background). Note that c21 , according to Eq. (10.11), controls the asymptotic value of the
                                                           −2
ratio between the string and the Planck scale, c21 λ−2
                                                    s = λP . The E-frame equations thus
become (omitting the tilde, and in units 2λ2P = 16πG = 1) [311]

            6H 2 = ρ + ρφ ,                                                                    (10.14)
            4Ḣ + 6H 2 = −p − pφ ,                                                     (10.15)
                                                          1                   
            k2 (φ) φ̈ + 3H φ̇ + k(φ) k′ (φ) φ̇2 + V̂ ′ (φ) + ψ ′ (φ)(ρ − 3p) + qρ = 0, (10.16)
                                                            2
where a dot denotes differentiation with respect to the E-frame cosmic time, and we have
defined:

                        k2 (φ) = 3ψ ′2 − 2eψ Z,               V̂ = c41 e2ψ V,                  (10.17)
                              1                                   1
                        ρφ = k2 (φ)φ̇2 + V̂ (φ),             pφ = k2 (φ)φ̇2 − V̂ (φ).          (10.18)
                              2                                   2
The source terms ρ, p, σ = qρ generically include the contribution of radiation, baryonic
and non-baryonic matter components, but only for the non-baryonic dark component ρd is
the dilaton charge assumed to be significantly different from zero, and parametrized as in
Eq. (10.12). By analysing the time evolution of the (total) dilaton energy density, ρφ , we
then find that the post-big bang solutions are generally characterized by three dynamical
phases [311].
    Suppose in fact that the radiation-dominated, post-big bang regime starts with with a
negligible dilaton potential, a negligible dark-matter energy density ρd ∼ a−3 , and a fully
kinetic dilaton energy density ,which is rapidly diluted as ρφ ∼ a−6 . When ρφ falls below
ρd one finds that the Universe enters a first “focusing” phase with ρφ ∼ a−2 , so that the
dilaton kinetic energy starts growing with respect to radiation, and converges towards the
other energy components.
   When the matter becomes dominant, the Universe enters a subsequent “dragging” phase,
where ρφ and ρd evolve in time with the same behaviour, together with the baryonic matter
density (uncoupled to the dilaton), ρb ∼ a−3 . Actually, ρφ and ρd are diluted a little bit


                                                   216
                 2
faster (like a−3−ǫ ) than ρb , but the deviation is controlled by a parameter, which is constant
and very small during the dragging phase,
                                                    
                                               ψ′ + q       q0 c1 1
                            [ǫ(φ)]drag ≡                   ∼ 2 ∼ 2 ≪ 1.                        (10.19)
                                                  k   drag  c  c2 c

    At late times (but not later than today) the potential V (φ) and the dilaton charge
q(φ) of dark-matter come eventually into play, and the Universe enters a “freezing” phase
characterized by a constant ratio ρφ /ρd , and by accelerated evolution. In this asymptotic
regime, φ → +∞, the parameters of the model approach the constant values

                     k2 (φ) = 2c22 /c21 ≡ 2/λ2 ,     σ = σd ,     ρ = ρd ,   q(φ) = q0 ,       (10.20)

and the E-frame equations can be written as
                               q0                                              q0
                  ρ̇d + 3Hρd − ρd φ̇ = 0,                       ρ̇φ + 6Hρk +      ρd φ̇ = 0,   (10.21)
                               2                                               2
                                                                   2Ḣ
                      1 = Ωd + Ωk + ΩV ,                    1+          = ΩV − Ωk ,            (10.22)
                                                                   3H 2
where

                        ρd = 6H 2 Ωd ,                      ρφ = ρk + ρV ,                     (10.23)
                                  2        2     2                      2
                        ρk = 6H Ωk = φ̇ /λ ,                ρV = 6H ΩV = V̂ .                  (10.24)

They can be solved by an asymptotic configuration with constant Ωk , ΩV and Ωd (acting
as late-time attractor [24]), where the dilaton fraction of critical energy density, Ωk + ΩV ,
the dilaton equation of state, wφ = (Ωk − ΩV )/(Ωk + ΩV ), and the asymptotic acceleration
parameter, are given by [311]
                             12 + q0 (q0 + 2)λ2                            q0 (q0 + 2)λ2
                     Ωφ =                       ,           wφ = −                         ,   (10.25)
                                (q0 + 2)2 λ2                            12 + q0 (q0 + 2)λ2
                      ä      Ḣ   q0 − 1
                         2
                           =1+ 2 =        .                                                    (10.26)
                     aH       H    q0 + 2

    Such an asymptotic configuration is illustrated in Fig. 10.2, where we have plotted
various curves at Ωφ = const and wφ = const in the {q0 , λ} plane. As shown in the figure, a
positive acceleration (q0 > 1) is perfectly compatible with the range of Ωφ and wφ allowed by
present phenomenological constraints [617, 49], namely 0.6 ∼ < Ωφ ∼< 0.7 and −1 ≤ wφ ∼< −0.4.

    We note, finally, that a simple integration of Eq. (10.26) gives the late-time evolution
of the dilaton and dark-matter energy density,

                                      ρφ ∼ ρd ∼ H 2 ∼ a−6/(2+q0 ) .                            (10.27)

The baryon dark matter, uncoupled to the dilaton (q = 0, ρb ∼ a−3 ), is rapidly diluted with
respect to ρd , and we thus obtain, in the context of such a dilatonic scenario, also a possible
explanation of the present smallness of the ratio ρb /ρd [311] (see also [27]).

                                                     217
                             5
                           4.5
                             4
                                         Ω5
                                                           -0.95
                           3.5
                             3                 Ω6      -0.9
                           2.5
                                              -0.7    Ω7
                             2
                                                               Ω8
                           1.5
                                      -0.4
                                       1        2          3        4
                                                q0



Figure 10.2: Asymptotic configurations in the plane {q0 , λ}, according to Eq. (10.25). The
full curves correspond to the constant values Ω5 = 0.5, Ω6 = 0.6, Ω7 = 0.7, Ω8 = 0.8, and
the dashed curves to the constant values of wφ indicated in the figure.


10.2    Other open problems

In this report we have focalized our attention on many important aspects of the pre-big
bang scenario (in particular, on those mainly studied in the past years), without pretending,
of course, to have presented an exhaustive discussion of all possible problems and aspects
of such scenario. There are important topics that we have left almost untouched, also
because too few results ae available on these in the present literature. Thus, it seems to us
appropriate to conclude with a list (and a brief discussion) of such topics, which we hope
will be the object of more intensive studies in the next years.
    In particular, we have given very little room to a discussion, in the pre-big bang context,
of a realistic model of (dynamical?) dimensional reduction of the superstring manifolds, the
(possible) compactification and the associated stabilization of the internal dimensions. The
best approach to this problem, at present, is probably the model of [109], generalized to
a brane-gas in [10, 103], which assumes, however, a toroidal structure of the space-time
manifold from the very beginning (as in standard Kaluza–Klein compactification). There
are no results, at present, concerning the possible evolution of the pre-big bang phase into a
multi-dimensional non-compact structure, eventually characterized by a warped geometry
able to confine long-range interactions on a four-dimensional brane [530].
    Also, we have not discussed in detail the matching of the pre-big bang regime to the
subsequent Friedmann–Robertson–Walker (FRW) phase, the possibility in this context of
background oscillations (of the metric and of the dilaton), with related “preheating” and
reheating effects, and the associated particle production (for instance gravitino production,
which is a potential problem [620] for any inflationary model based on a supersymmetric
theory). All these problems, including dimensional reduction, are (more or less directly)
related to the fact that there is at present no compelling model of a complete and realistic


                                              218
exit transition (see Section 8).
    It is worth mentioning, in this respect, that the problem of reheating and of possible
dangerous relics (moduli and gravitinos) in pre-big bang cosmology has recently been faced
in [132]. The main difference from the reheating scenario of standard inflationary models is
that, for pre-big bang inflation, the matching to the FRW phase may occur in principle at
higher-curvature scales (typically, H1 ∼ Ms ∼ 1017 GeV), where gravitinos and moduli fields
should also be copiously produced in scattering processes. Another important difference is
that the particles present at the beginning of the FRW phase are produced (with various
spectra) directly from the amplification of the quantum fluctuations of the background fields
during inflation (as stressed in Subsection 8.4), with typical densities ρi (t) ∼ Ni H14 (a1 /a)4 ,
where Ni is the number of helicity states in species i.
    In such a context, the thermalization scale of scalar and vector particles, charged under
the group of the observable sector, has been estimated in [132] by assuming that the dilaton
and the internal dimensions are already frozen at the beginning of the FRW phase, when
H = H1 and g = g1 ≡ Ms /MP (t1 ). The charged particles, with typical energy ω ∼ H1 a1 /a
and number density nr ∼ ρr /ω, where
                                                                            2         4
                                  Nr H12 MP2 a41   Nr                H1 Ms          a1
                    ρr = Ω r ρc ∼                =                                            (10.28)
                                  Ntot   a4        Ntot               g1            a

(Ntot is the total number of degrees of freedom present at t = t1 ), interact with cross section
σ ∼ α2 /ω 2 , where α ∼ g12 . The thermalization scale Hth ∼ nr σ is then given by
                                                          2
                                                    Nr          Ms4
                                    Hth ∼ g14                       .                         (10.29)
                                                    Ntot        H13

    If the charged particles are already dominat at t = t1 , i.e. Nr ∼ Ntot , Ωr ∼ 1, and if
H1 ∼ Ms as in minimal pre-big bang models, then the post-big bang Universe thermalizes
at a scale Hth ∼ g14 H1 ∼ (10−4 – 10−8 ) Ms , with a corresponding reheating temperature
                      5/2         3/2
Tr ∼ (Hth MP )1/2 ∼ g1 MP ∼ g1 Ms . If, on the contrary, Ωr < 1, then reheating is only
achieved once the gauge-singlet fields, which carry the remainder of the total energy density,
have decayed into radiation.
    Such a reheating process generates an entropy density s ∼ ρr /Tr , which is not sufficient,
however, to dilute the unwanted relic particles produced gravitationally during inflation,
and also in scatterings of the thermal bath for t > t1 . For the moduli, in particular, the
number-density-to-entropy-density ratio Ym = nm /sm turns out to be [132] Ym ∼ 0.3/g∗ ,
where g∗ is the number of degrees of freedom in the radiation bath after thermalization. For
g∗ ∼ 102 – 103 this is well above the limit imposed by nucleosynthesis [620], which implies
Y ∼< 10−13 .

   The same is true for gravitinos. Indeed, even if they are not gravitationally produced
during pre-big bang inflation because they keep effectively massless [120], gravitinos are

                                                219
produced in scatterings of the high-temperature thermal bath, and their number to entropy
                                                           5/2 −7/4
ratio can be estimated (for H1 ∼ Ms ) as [132] Y3/2 ∼ g1 g∗ , which is still in excess of
the nucleosynthesis limit (see also [431, 584] for gravitino production in a string cosmology
context).
    The dilution of the unwanted relics possibly present at the beginning of the post-big bang
phase thus requires a strong entropy release, at the level of about ten orders of magnitude
for gravitationally produced relics in the context of minimal pre-big bang models (so as to
suppress Y from 10−3 to 10−13 ). Such an entropy production may be due to a secondary
reheating phase, as already discussed in Subsection 6.3, and a typical possibility corresponds
to the oscillations and decay of a scalar (or pseudoscalar) field, which gets a mass in the
post-big bang epoch through a symmetry- (or supersymmetry-) breaking mechanism.
    A natural string-cosmology candidate for this effect is the axion (as discussed in Sub-
section 7.5), or even the dilaton, if it is heavy enough. In particular, if the initial value of
the oscillating field is at least of order Ms , it is possible to dilute in this way moduli and
gravitinos, but not monopoles (possibly produced by GUT symmetry breaking), while an
initial value of order MP is marginally sufficient also for monopoles [132].
     It is possible, however, that the monopole problem be independently solved by an ef-
ficient monopole–antimonopole annihilation [176]. We should keep in mind, also, that in
more complicated, non-minimal pre-big bang backgrounds (see Subsection 5.3), the energy
distribution among the produced particles may be drastically altered, with a resulting easier
dilution of the relics component, and a smaller required amount of entropy production (see
[132] for a detailed discussion).
    We note, finally, that the entropy-production process is independently interesting by
itself, in such a context, as it can naturally accommodate baryogenesis if the oscillating
scalar is identified with the Affleck–Dine condensate, made of squarks and sleptons, whose
decay generates the baryon asymmetry [6]. In particular, a “mixed” reheating phase with
two oscillating fields (a modulus and a condensate), seems to be able to reproduce both
the required dilution of relics and the right baryon asymmetry in the context of pre-big
bang cosmology [132]. The oscillations of the Affleck–Dine condensate could be sufficient,
by themselves, to solve the moduli and gravitinos problem in the context of non-minimal
pre-big bang models, provided the resulting baryon asymmetry were kept small enough
by a very small CP-violation parameter, or by a very efficient electroweak mechanism of
baryon-number erasure [261].


10.3    Outlook

Although it is always difficult to make forecasts, particularly in theoretical physics, we
are at least confident of one thing: research on the implications of string/M-theory on
fundamental cosmological questions is not just a momentary fashion. It is going to continue


                                              220
at an increasing rate as long as new cosmological data come in, and put more and more
puzzles in front of theoretical cosmology. Indeed, the last few years have witnessed a sudden
jump of interest in this field, triggered partly by the new data on CMB anisotropy and on
evidence for an accelerating Universe, partly by the new theoretical developments related to
large extra dimensions, the possible lowering of the quantum-gravity scale, and the brane-
world ideas.
     One line of research has been devoted to the modifications of the standard cosmological
equations for observers confined to a brane immersed in a higher-dimensional space-time
[88]. Such modifications are in principle sufficiently drastic to make us worry about how
to preserve the successes of the standard set-up, on the one hand, and about how to use
the deviations in order to improve the situation where the standard description may face
difficulties (e.g. during inflation [179] and early cosmology) on the other hand.
    A second development, which is even more relevant to this report, is the proposal of
new cosmologies [412, 413] that share many properties with the pre-big bang scenario. As
in the latter, they assume that the big bang singularity is spurious, and that the Universe
(and time) had a long existence prior to it. Also, the initial state is assumed to be very
perturbative, although not as generic as in our approach. The most important difference,
however, is that such models are constructed around the brane-world idea (see Subsection
8.5). Thus, although some of the pictures look very similar, their meaning is drastically
different. As an example, the plane-wave collision described in Subsection 3.4 superficially
resembles the brane collision of the ekpyrotic scenario; but while in the former our Universe
lies in the bulk, in the model of [412, 413] it lies on one of the two colliding branes. Also,
the big bang is the moment of collision in [412, 413] while, in the pre-big bang scenario, it
emerges sometime after the collision, as a consequence of gravitational collapse.
    The model in [413] is even closer to the pre-big bang idea, in the sense that, there,
the extra dimension represents the dilaton in the strong-coupling regime, according to the
M-theory conjecture [376]. It is thus possible to draw the bouncing-Universe scenario of
[413] in the same phase-space plane as was used in Fig. 8.1. The difference between the two
scenarios is very simple: while the pre-big bang Universe starts its evolution in the upper-
right quadrant of the diagram –and thus inflates, in the S-frame, as it evolves from weak
to strong coupling– in the scenario of [413] the Universe starts in the lower-right quadrant
and thus contracts, even in the S-frame, while it evolves from strong to weak coupling.
    We have seen in Subsections 1.3 and 2.4 that an accelerated contraction is as good as
an accelerated expansion for solving the horizon and flatness problems, hence the model
of [413] appears a priori as good as the pre-big bang model. It is important, however, to
stress some differences, especially regarding the exit problem. If the exit is to occur at weak
coupling, it should be possible to study it within the tree-level effective action (although
non-perturbatively in α′ ). This was precisely the framework described in Subsection 8.2,
where it was shown that, at least order by order in the α′ expansion, a conserved quantity


                                             221
forbids a transition from contraction to expansion in the S-frame. The possibility remains,
however, of non-perturbative (world-sheet instanton) effects for achieving the bounce.
    Still at the theoretical level, both the ekpyrotic and the pre-big bang scenario suffer
from the criticism of [190] about the generic occurrence of a phase of chaotic oscillations.
This is even more crucial for the models of [412, 413], since they need a highly fine-tuned
initial state [389, 390] and, again, cannot invoke string-loop corrections for stopping BKL
oscillations.
    At the more phenomenological level the main difference between the two classes of mod-
els concerns the spectrum of (adiabatic) scalar metric perturbations. While these have
been claimed to have naturally a blue spectrum in a pre-big bang context [115] (see also
[382, 583]), the authors of [412] have claimed to get naturally (although through a certain
hypothesis on the shape of a potential) a scale-invariant spectrum, as favoured by obser-
vations. Without taking sides, we will mention that this claim has been challenged by
several authors [456, 105] (see however [227]). On the other hand, the curvaton mechanism
of [459] could still generate scale-invariant adiabatic perturbations even if these were not
immediately generated during the pre-big bang (or pre-bounce) phase.
    Since string/M-theory is proposed by its fans as a candidate unified theory of all phe-
nomena, it simply cannot allow itself to avoid tackling the fundamental questions that
classical and quantum gravity are proposing: What is the fate of the classical singularities
–that are so ubiquitous in general relativity– in the context of a consistent quantum theory
of gravity?
    In this report the pre-big bang scenario was described in such a way that the reader’s
attention was drawn to the big bang singularity of general relativity and to how its avoid-
ance, in string theory, could open up new possibilities for solving the long-standing problems
of classical, hot big bang cosmology. Amusingly, in doing so, we were led to connect this
question to the other big puzzle of general relativity: the fate of black-hole singularities,
with all its ramifications into the information paradox, the loss of quantum coherence, and
the like.
   To conclude, let us try to draw some generic lessons from the particular attempt at a
new, string-based cosmology that we have illustrated in the previous sections.

 (1) Neither our Universe, nor space and time themselves, have to emerge from a sin-
     gularity: the singularities of classical gravitational theories should signal the lack of
     finite-size and quantum corrections, or the need for new degrees of freedom in the
     description of physics at very short distances. Also, the Universe did not have to start
     from the very beginning as a hot and dense “soup” of particles and radiation: a hot
     Universe can emerge from a cold one, thanks to the parametric amplification of the
     quantum fluctuations of the vacuum, during inflation.

 (2) Inflation does not need a scalar potential (or, more generally, an effective cosmological

                                             222
     constant), and can naturally appear as the result of the underlying duality symmetries
     of the cosmological background. Also, inflation can be represented as a contraction
     (in the appropriate frame), and the study of generic initial conditions can be related,
     mathematically, to the study of gravitational collapse in general relativity.

 (3) The Planck scale does not provide any fundamental impenetrable barrier, which would
     limit our direct experimental information on what happened before. On the contrary,
     the phenomenological imprint of the pre-Planckian epoch can be encoded into a rich
     spectrum of observable relics, reaching us today directly out of the pre-big bang
     Universe. Pre-big bang physics can thus be the object of dedicated experimental
     searches, which will be able to tell us, hopefully in a not too far future, whether
     or not there are chances for present string-cosmology models to provide a successful
     description of our primordial Universe.



Acknowledgements

It is a pleasure to thank all our collaborators during more than a decade of fun with string
cosmology. In alphabetical order, they are: Valerio Bozza, Ram Brustein, Alessandra Buo-
nanno, Cyril Cartier, Edmund Copeland, Thibault Damour, Giuseppe De Risi, Ruth Durrer,
Massimo Giovannini, Amit Ghosh, Richard Madden, Michele Maggiore, Jnan Maharana,
Krzysztov Meissner, Alessandro Melchiorri, Slava Mukhanov, Federico Piazza, Giuseppe
Pollifrone, Roberto Ricci, Mairi Sakellariadou, Norma Sanchez, Carlo Ungarelli and Filippo
Vernizzi. We are also indebted to Suzy Vascotto for going through the pain of proof-reading
a preliminary version of this long paper.




                                            223
References

 [1] R. B. Abbott, S. M. Barr and S. D. Ellis, Phys. Rev. D30, 720 (1984).

 [2] R. B. Abbott, B. Bednarz and S. D. Ellis, Phys. Rev. D33, 2147 (1986).

 [3] L.F. Abbot and M. B. Wise, Nucl. Phys. B244, 541 (1984).

 [4] A. Abramovici et al., Science 256, 325 (1992).

 [5] M. Abramowitz and I. A. Stegun, Handbook of mathematical functions (Dover, New
     York, 1972).

 [6] I. Affleck and M. Dine, Nucl. Phys. B249, 361 (1985).

 [7] E. J. Ahn, M. Cavaglià and A. Olinto, hep-th/0201042.

 [8] E. J. Ahn and M. Cavaglià, hep-ph/0205168.

 [9] K. Akama and H. Terazawa, Gen. Relat. Gravit. 15, 201 (1983).

[10] S. Alexander, R. Brandenberger and D. Easson, Phys. Rev. D62, 103509 (2000).

[11] S. O. Alexeyev, A. V. Toporensky and V. O. Ustiansky, Class. Quant. Grav. 17, 2243
     (2000).

[12] B. Allen, Phys. Rev. D37, 2078 (1988).

[13] B. Allen, in Astrophysical Sources of Gravitational waves, Proc. Les Houches School,
     1996, eds. J. A. Marck and J. P. Lasota ( University Press, Cambridge, 1997), p. 373.

[14] B. Allen and R. Brustein, Phys. Rev. D55, 3260 (1997).

[15] B. Allen, E. E. Flanagan and M. A. Papa, Phys. Rev. D61, 024024 (2000).

[16] B. Allen and S. Koranda, Phys. Rev. D50, 3713 (1994).

[17] B. Allen and J. D. Romano, Phys. Rev. D59, 102001 (1999).

[18] E. Alvarez, Phys. Rev. D31, 418 (1985).

[19] E. Alvarez and J. Conde, Mod. Phys. Lett. A17, 413 (2002).

[20] E. Alvarez and M. Osorio, Int. J. Theor. Phys. 28, 949 (1989).

[21] U. Amaldi, W. de Boer and H. Furstenau, Phys. Lett. B260, 447 (1991).

[22] D. Amati, M. Ciafaloni and G. Veneziano, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A3, 1615 (1988).

[23] D. Amati, M. Ciafaloni and G. Veneziano, Phys. Lett. B216, 41 (1989).

                                          224
[24] L. Amendola, Phys. Rev. D 62, 043511 (2000).

[25] L. Amendola, M. Litterio and F. Occhionero, Phys. Lett. B237, 348 (1990).

[26] L. Amendola and D. Tocchini-Valentini, Phys. Rev. D 64, 043509 (2001).

[27] L. Amendola and D. Tocchini-Valentini, Phys. Rev. D65, 063508 (2002).

[28] S. Anderegg and V. N. Mukhanov, Phys. Lett. B331, 30 (1994).

[29] C. Angelantonj, L. Amendola, M. Litterio and F. Occhionero, Phys. Rev. D51, 1607
     (1995).

[30] I. Antoniadis, in Gravitational Waves and Experimental Gravity, Proc. XXXIV Ren-
     contres de Moriond, Les Arcs, 1999, eds. J. Tran Thanh Van et al. (World Scientific,
     Singapore, 2000).

[31] I. Antoniadis, N. Arkani-Hamed, S. Dimopoulos and G. Dvali, Phys. Lett. B436, 257
     (1998).

[32] I. Antoniadis, E. Gava and K. S. Narain, Phys. Lett. B283, 209 (1992).

[33] I. Antoniadis, E. Gava and K. S. Narain, Nucl. Phys. B393, 93 (1992).

[34] I. Antoniadis, J. Rizos, and K. Tamvakis, Nucl. Phys. B415, 497 (1994).

[35] N. Arkani-Hamed, S. Dimopoulos and G. Dvali, Phys. Lett. B429, 263 (1998).

[36] A. Ashtekar and R. Geroch, Rep. Prog. Phys. 37, 1211 (1974).

[37] P. Astone, in Proc. Second Edoardo Amaldi Conference on Gravitational Waves,
     CERN, 1997, eds. E. Coccia et al. (World Scientific, Singapore, 1998), p. 192.

[38] P. Astone et al., Astron. Astrophys. 351, 811 (1999).

[39] P. Astone et al., in Proc. Second Edoardo Amaldi Conference on Gravitational Waves,
     CERN, 1997, eds. E. Coccia et al. (World Scientific, Singapore, 1998), p. 551.

[40] P. Astone, J. Lobo and B. Schutz, Classical Quant. Grav. 11, 2093 (1994).

[41] P. Astone, G. Pallottino and G. Pizzella, Classical Quant. Grav. 14, 2019 (1997).

[42] M. Axenides, R. H. Brandenberger and M. S. Turner, Phys. Lett. B126, 178 (1983).

[43] D. Babusci, L. Baiotti, F. Fucito and A. Nagar, Phys. Rev. D64, 062001 (2001).

[44] D. Babusci, S. Foffa, G. Losurdo, M. Maggiore, G. Matone and R. Sturani, in Gravi-
     tational Waves, Proc. SIGRAV School, Centre A. Volta, Como, 1999, eds. I. Ciufolini
     et al. (IOP Publishing, Bristol, 2001), p. 179.


                                          225
[45] D. Babusci and M. Giovannini, Int. J. Mod. Phys. D10, 477 (2001).

[46] D. Babusci and M. Giovannini, Phys. Rev. D60, 083511 (1999).

[47] D. Babusci and M. Giovannini, Classical Quant. Grav. 17, 2621 (2000).

[48] D. Bak and S. Rey, Classical Quant. Grav. 17, L1 (2000).

[49] A. Balbi, C. Baccigalupi, S. Matarrese, F. Perrotta and N. Vittorio, Astrophys. J.
     547, L89 (2001).

[50] A. J. Banday et al., Astrophys. J. 475, 393 (1997).

[51] T. Banks, W. Fischler and L. Motl, JHEP 9901, 019 (1999).

[52] T. Banks, D. B. Kaplan and A. E. Nelson, Phys. Rev. D49, 779 (1994).

[53] J. Bardeen, Phys. Rev. D22, 1822 (1980).

[54] R. Bar-Kana, Phys. Rev. D64, 7138 (1996).

[55] J. D. Barrow, Phys. Lett. B180, 335 (1986).

[56] J. D. Barrow, Phys. Rev. D48, 3592 (1993).

[57] J. D. Barrow and M. P. Dabrowski, Phys. Rev. D55, 630 (1997).

[58] J. D. Barrow and M. P. Dabrowski, Phys. Rev. D57, 7204 (1998).

[59] J. D. Barrow and M. P. Dabrowski, Phys. Rev. D58, 103502 (1998).

[60] J. D. Barrow and K. E. Kunze, Phys. Rev. D55, 623 (1997).

[61] J. D. Barrow and K. E. Kunze, Phys. Rev. D56, 741 (1997).

[62] J. D. Barrow and K. E. Kunze, Phys. Rev. D57, 2255 (1998).

[63] J. D. Barrow and K. E. Kunze, Chaos, Soliton Frac. 10, 257 (1999).

[64] J. D. Barrow, J. P. Mimoso and M. R. de Garcia Maia, Phys. Rev. D48, 3630 (1993).

[65] N. Bartolo and A. R. Liddle, Phys. Rev. D65, 121301 (2002).

[66] B. A. Bassett, Phys. Rev. D 56, 3439 (1997).

[67] B. A. Bassett, C. Gordon, R. Maartens and D. I. Kaiser, Phys. Rev. D61, 061302
     (2000).

[68] R. A. Battye and E. P. S. Shellard, Phys. Rev. D53, 1811 (1996).

[69] K. Behrndt and S. Forste, Phys. Lett. B320, 253 (1993).

                                          226
[70] K. Behrndt, S. Forste and S. Schwager, Nucl. Phys. B508, 391 (1997).

[71] J. D. Bekenstein, Phys. Rev. D7, 2333 (1973).

[72] J. D. Bekenstein, Phys. Rev. D23, 287 (1981).

[73] J. D. Bekenstein, Int. J. Theor. Phys. 28, 967 (1989).

[74] J. D. Bekenstein, Phys. Rev. D49, 1912 (1994).

[75] V. A. Belinskii and I. M. Khalatnikov, Sov. Phys. JETP 36, 591 (1973).

[76] V. A. Belinskii, I. M. Khalatnikov and E. M. Lifshitz, Adv. Phys. 19, 525 (1970).

[77] C. L. Bennet et al., Astrophys. J. 430, 423 (1994).

[78] C. L. Bennet et al., Astrophys. J. 464, L1 (1996).

[79] M. G. Bento and O. Bertolami, Classical Quant. Grav. 12, 1919 (1995).

[80] P. Bernard, G. Gemme, R. Parodi and E. Picasso, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 72, 2428 (2001).

[81] O. Bertolami and D. F. Mota, Phys. Lett. B455, 96 (1999).

[82] M. Bianchi, M. Brunetti, E. Coccia, F. Fucito and J. A. Lobo, Phys. Rev. D 57, 4525
     (1998).

[83] M. Bianchi, E. Coccia, C. Colacino, V. Fafone and F. Fucito, Classical Quant. Grav.
     13, 2865 (1996).

[84] A. P. Billyard, A. A. Coley and J. E. Lidsey, Phys. Rev. D59, 123505 (1999).

[85] A. P. Billyard, A. A. Coley and J. E. Lidsey, J. Math. Phys. 40, 5092 (1999).

[86] A. P. Billyard, A. A. Coley and J. E. Lidsey, Classical Quant. Grav. 17, 453 (2000).

[87] A. P. Billyard, A. A. Coley, J. E. Lidsey and U. S. Nilsson, Phys. Rev. D61, 043504
     (2000).

[88] P. Binétruy, C. Deffayet and D. Langlois, Nucl. Phys. B565, 269 (2000).

[89] P. Binétruy and M. K. Gaillard, Phys. Rev. D34, 3069 (1986).

[90] N. D. Birrel and P. C. W. Davies, Quantum fields in curved spaces (University Press,
     Cambridge, 1982).

[91] A. K. Bisvas, J. Maharana and R. K. Pradhan, Phys. Lett. B462, 243 (1999).

[92] H. J. Blome and W. Priester, Astron. Astrophys. 250, 43 (1991).



                                          227
 [93] H. Bondi, M. G. J. van der Burg and A. W. K. Metzner, Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond. A269,
      21 (1962).

 [94] A. Borde, A. Guth and A. Vilenkin, gr-qc/0110012.

 [95] A. Borde and A. Vilenkin, Phys. Rev. Lett. 72, 3305 (1994).

 [96] R. Bousso, JHEP 9906, 028 (1999).

 [97] R. Bousso, JHEP 9907, 004 (1999).

 [98] M. J. Bowick, L. Smolin and L. C. R. Wijewardhana, Gen. Relat. Gravit. 19, 113
      (1987).

 [99] V. Bozza, M. Gasperini and G. Veneziano, Nucl. Phys. B619, 191 (2001).

[100] V. Bozza, M. Gasperini, M. Giovannini and G. Veneziano, hep-ph/0206131.

[101] V. Bozza and G. Veneziano, JHEP 0010, 35 (2000).

[102] R. Brandenberger, APCTP Bulletin 6 (2001).

[103] R. H. Brandenberger, D. Easson and D. Kimberly, Nucl. Phys. B623, 421 (2002).

[104] R. H. Brandenberger, R. Easther and J. Maia, JHEP 9808, 007 (1998).

[105] R. Brandenberger and F. Finelli, JHEP 0111, 056 (2001).

[106] R. Brandenberger, V. F. Mukhanov and T. Prokopec, Phys. Rev. Lett. 69, 3606
      (1992).

[107] R. Brandenberger, V. F. Mukhanov and T. Prokopec, Phys. Rev. D48, 2443 (1993).

[108] R. Brandenberger, V. F. Mukhanov and A. Sornborger, Phys. Rev. D48, 1629 (1993).

[109] R. Brandenberger and C. Vafa, Nucl. Phys. B316, 391 (1989).

[110] M. Brandle, A. Lukas and B. A. Ovrut, Phys. Rev. D63, 026003 (2001).

[111] M. Brunetti, E. Coccia, V. Fafone and F. Fucito, Phys. Rev. D59, 44027 (1999).

[112] M. Bruni, G. F. R. Ellis and P. K. S. Dunsby, Classical Quant. Grav. 9, 921 (1992).

[113] R. Brustein, Chaos, Soliton Frac. 10, 283 (1999).

[114] R. Brustein, S. Foffa and R. Sturani, Phys. Lett. B471, 352 (2000).

[115] R. Brustein, M. Gasperini, M. Giovannini, V. Mukhanov and G. Veneziano, Phys.
      Rev. D51, 6744 (1995).



                                           228
[116] R. Brustein, M. Gasperini, M. Giovannini and G. Veneziano, Phys. Lett. B361, 45
      (1995).

[117] R. Brustein, M. Gasperini and G. Veneziano, Phys. Rev D55, 3882 (1997).

[118] R. Brustein, M. Gasperini and G. Veneziano, Phys. Lett. B431, 277 (1998).

[119] R. Brustein and M. Hadad, Phys. Rev. D57, 725 (1998).

[120] R. Brustein and M. Hadad, Phys. Lett. B477, 263 (2000).

[121] R. Brustein and R. Madden, Phys. Lett. B410, 110 (1997).

[122] R. Brustein and R. Madden, Phys. Rev. D57, 712 (1998).

[123] R. Brustein and R. Madden, JHEP 9907, 006 (1999).

[124] R. Brustein and D. H. Oaknin, Phys. Rev. D60, 023508 (1999).

[125] R. Brustein and P. J. Steinhardt, Phys. Lett. B302, 196 (1993).

[126] R. Brustein and G. Veneziano, Phys. Lett. B329, 429 (1994).

[127] R. Brustein and G. Veneziano, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 5695 (2000).

[128] A. Buonanno and T. Damour, Phys. Rev. D64, 043501 (2001).

[129] A. Buonanno, T. Damour and G. Veneziano, Nucl. Phys. B543, 275 (1999).

[130] A. Buonanno, M. Gasperini, M. Maggiore and C. Ungarelli, Classical Quant. Grav.14,
      L97 (1997).

[131] A. Buonanno, M. Gasperini and C. Ungarelli, Mod. Phys. Lett. A12, 1883 (1997).

[132] A. Buonanno, M. Lemoine and K. A. Olive, Phys. Rev. D62, 083513 (2000).

[133] A. Buonanno, M. Maggiore and C. Ungarelli, Phys. Rev. D55, 3330 (1997).

[134] A. Buonanno, K. A. Meissner, C. Ungarelli and G. Veneziano, Phys. Rev. D57, 2543
      (1998).

[135] A. Buonanno, K. A. Meissner, C. Ungarelli and G. Veneziano, JHEP 9801, 004 (1998).

[136] E. R. Caianiello, M. Gasperini and G. Scarpetta, Classical Quant. Grav. 8, 659 (1991).

[137] R. R. Caldwell and B. Allen, Phys. Rev. D45, 3447 (1992).

[138] R. R. Caldwell, R. Dave and P. J. Steinhardt, Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 582 (1998).

[139] C. Callan, S. Giddings, J. Harvey and A. Strominger, Phys. Rev. D45, R1005 (1992).


                                            229
[140] C. G. Callan, R. C. Myers and M. J. Perry, Nucl. Phys. B311, 673 (1988).

[141] B. A. Campbell, A. Linde and K. A. Olive, Nucl. Phys. B355, 146 (1991).

[142] S. Capozziello and R. De Ritis, Int. J. Mod. Phys. D2, 367 (1993).

[143] S. Capozziello and R. De Ritis, Int. J. Mod. Phys. D2, 373 (1993).

[144] C. Caprini and R. Durrer, Phys. Rev. D65, 023517 (2002).

[145] B. Caron et al., Classical Quant. Grav. 14, 1461 (1997).

[146] B. J. Carr, Astrophys. J. 201, 1 (1975).

[147] B. J. Carr and S. W. Hawking, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 168, 399 (1974).

[148] C. Cartier, E. J. Copeland and M. Gasperini, Nucl. Phys. B607, 406 (2001).

[149] C. Cartier, E. J. Copeland and R. Madden, JHEP 0001, 035 (2000).

[150] C. Cartier, J. C. Hwang and E. J. Copeland, Phys. Rev. D64, 103504 (2001).

[151] M. Cavaglià, Classical Quant. Grav. 18, 1355 (2001).

[152] M. Cavaglià and V. De Alfaro, Gen. Relat. Gravit. 29, 773 (1997).

[153] M. Cavaglià and P. V. Moniz, Classical Quant. Grav. 18, 95 (2001).

[154] M. Cavaglià and C. Ungarelli, Classical Quant. Grav. 16, 1401 (1999).

[155] M. Cavaglià and C. Ungarelli, Nucl. Phys. Proc. Suppl. B88, 355 (2000).

[156] M. Cerdonio, L. Conti, J.A. Lobo, A. Ortolan and J. P. Zendri, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87,
      031101 (2001).

[157] B. Cheng and A. V. Olinto, Phys. Rev. D50, 2421 (1994).

[158] T. Chiba, Phys. Rev. D59, 083508 (1999).

[159] G. V. Chibisov and V. N. Mukhanov, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 200, 535 (1982)

[160] A. Chincarini, G. Gemme, R. Parodi, P. Bernard and E. Picasso, gr-qc/0203024.

[161] M. W. Choptuik, Phys. Rev. Lett. 70, 9 (1993).

[162] N. Christensen, Phys. Rev. D46, 5250 (1992).

[163] D. Christodoulou, Commun. Math. Phys. 105, 337 (1986).

[164] D. Christodoulou, Commun. Math. Phys. 109, 613 (1987).


                                           230
[165] D. Christodoulou, Commun. Pure Appl. Math. 44, 339 (1991).

[166] D. Christodoulou, Commun. Pure Appl. Math. 46, 11331 (1993).

[167] D. Clancy, A. Feinstein, J. E. Lidsey and R. Tavakol, Phys. Rev. D60, 043503 (1999).

[168] D. Clancy, A. Feinstein, J. E. Lidsey and R. Tavakol, Phys. Lett. B451, 303 (1999).

[169] D. Clancy, J. E. Lidsey and R. Tavakol, Classical Quant. Grav. 15, 257 (1998).

[170] D. Clancy, J. E. Lidsey and R. Tavakol, Phys. Rev. D58, 44017 (1998).

[171] D. Clancy, J. E. Lidsey and R. Tavakol, Phys. Rev. D59, 063511(1999).

[172] E. Coccia, V. Fafone, G. Frossati, J. Lobo and J. Ortega, Phys. Rev. D57, 2051
      (1998).

[173] E. Coccia, V. Fafone and I. Modena, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 63, 5432 (1992).

[174] E. Coccia, M. Gasperini and C. Ungarelli, Phys. Rev. D65, 067101 (2002).

[175] E. J. Copeland, R. Easther and D. Wands, Phys. Rev. D56, 874 (1997).

[176] E. J. Copeland, D. Haws, T. W. Kibble, D. Mitchell and N. Turok, Nucl. Phys. B298,
      445 (1988).

[177] E. J. Copeland, A. Lahiri and D. Wands, Phys. Rev. D50, 4868 (1994).

[178] E. J. Copeland, A. Lahiri and D. Wands, Phys. Rev. D51, 1569 (1995).

[179] E. J. Copeland, A. R. Liddle and J. E. Lidsey, Phys. Rev. D64, 023509 (2001).

[180] E. J. Copeland, A. R. Liddle, J. E. Lidsey and D. Wands, Phys. Rev. D58, 63508
      (1998)

[181] E. J. Copeland, A. R. Liddle, J. E. Lidsey and D. Wands, Gen. Relat. Gravit. 30,
      1711 (1998).

[182] E. J. Copeland, J. E. Lidsey and D. Wands, Nucl. Phys. B506, 407 (1997).

[183] E. J. Copeland, J. E. Lidsey and D. Wands, Phys. Rev. D57, 625 (1998).

[184] E. J. Copeland, J. E. Lidsey and D. Wands, Phys. Lett. B443, 97 (1998).

[185] E. J. Copeland, P. M. Saffin and O. Tornkvist, Phys. Rev. D61, 105005 (2000).

[186] E. Cremmer, B. Julia and J. Scherk, Phys. Lett. B76, 409 (1978).

[187] A. M. Cruise, Classical Quant. Grav. 17, 2525 (2000).



                                           231
[188] E. Cuoco, G. Curci and E. Beccaria, in Proc. Second Edoardo Amaldi Conference on
      Gravitational Waves, CERN, 1997, eds. E. Coccia et al. (World Scientific, Singapore,
      1998), p. 524.

[189] M. Dabrowski and C. Kiefer, Phys. Lett. B397, 185 (1997).

[190] T. Damour and M. Henneaux, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 920 (2000).

[191] T. Damour and M. Henneaux, Gen. Relat. Gravit. 32, 2339 (2000).

[192] T. Damour and M. Henneaux, Phys. Lett. B488, 108 (2000).

[193] T. Damour and M. Henneaux, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 4749 (2001).

[194] T. Damour, M. Henneaux, B. Julia and H. Nicolai, Phys. Lett. B509, 323 (2001).

[195] T. Damour, F. Piazza and G. Veneziano, gr-qc/0204094.

[196] T. Damour, F. Piazza and G. Veneziano, hep-th/0205111.

[197] T. Damour and A. M. Polyakov, Nucl. Phys. B423, 532 (1994).

[198] T. Damour and A. M. Polyakov, Gen. Relat. Gravit. 26, 1171 (1994).

[199] T. Damour and A. Vilenkin, Phys. Rev. D53, 2981 (1996).

[200] T. Damour and A. Vilenkin, Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 2288 (1997).

[201] A. Davis, K. Dimopoulos, T. Prokopec and O. Tornkvist, Phys. Lett. B501, 165
      (2001).

[202] S. P. de Alwis, Phys. Lett. B289, 278 (1992).

[203] P. de Bernardis et al., Nature 404, 955 (2000).

[204] P. de Bernardis et al., Astrophys. J. 564, 559 (2002).

[205] B. De Carlos, J. A. Casas, F. Quevedo and E. Roulet, Phys. Lett. B318, 447 (1993).

[206] X. C. de la Ossa and F. Quevedo, Nucl. Phys. B403, 377 (1993).

[207] M. Demianski, in Proc. It. Conf. on General Relativity and Gravitational Physics,
      Capri, 1990, eds. R. Cianci et al. (World Scientific, Singapore, 1991), p. 19.

[208] M. Demianski, A. G. Polnarev and P. Naselski, Phys. Rev. D47, 5275 (1993).

[209] J. P. Derendinger, S. Ferrara, C. Kounnas and F. Zwirner, Phys. Lett. B271, 307
      (1991).

[210] G. De Risi and M. Gasperini, Phys. Lett. B503, 140 (2001).

                                            232
[211] G. De Risi and M. Gasperini, Phys. Lett. B521, 335 (2001).

[212] N. Deruelle, C. Gundlach and D. Polarski, Classical Quant. Grav. 9, 137 91992).

[213] N. Deruelle, C. Gundlach and D. Langlois, Phys. Rev. D45, R3301 (1992).

[214] N. Deruelle and V. F. Mukhanov, Phys. Rev. D52, 5549 (1995).

[215] H. J. de Vega, A. L. Larsen and N. Sanchez, Phys. Rev. D61, 066003 (2000).

[216] B. S. De Witt, Phys. Rev. 160, 1113 (1967).

[217] S. Dimopoulos et al., Astrophys. J. 330, 545 (1988).

[218] A. D. Dolgov, Phys. Rev. D48, 2499 (1993).

[219] M. R. Douglas, in Nonperturbative Aspects of Strings, Branes and Supersymmetry,
      Proc. ICTP Spring School, Trieste, 1998 (World Scientific, Singapore, 1999), p. 131.

[220] R. Durrer, Phys. Rev. D42, 2533 (1990).

[221] R. Durrer, Fundams. Cosm. Phys., 15, 209 (1994).

[222] R. Durrer, J. Phys. Stud. 5, 177 (2001).

[223] R. Durrer, M. Gasperini, M. Sakellariadou and G. Veneziano, Phys. Lett. B436, 66
      (1998).

[224] R. Durrer, M. Gasperini, M. Sakellariadou and G. Veneziano, Phys. Rev. D59, 43511
      (1999).

[225] R. Durrer and J. Laukenmann, Classical Quant. Grav. 13, 1069 (1996).

[226] R. Durrer and M. Sakellariadou, Phys. Rev. D62, 123504 (2000).

[227] R. Durrer and F. Vernizzi, hep-ph/0203275.

[228] D. M. Eardley and S. B. Giddings, gr-qc/0201034.

[229] D. Easson, hep-th/0111055, in Proc. of the COSMO-01 Workshop, Rovaniemi, 2001.

[230] D. A. Easson and R. Brandenberger, JHEP 9909, 003 (1999).

[231] R. Easther and D. A. Lowe, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 4967 (1999).

[232] R. Easther and K. Maeda, Phys. Rev. D54, 7572 (1996).

[233] R. Easther, K. Maeda and D. Wands, Phys. Rev. D53, 4247 (1996).

[234] G. F. R. Ellis and M. Bruni, Phys. Rev. D40, 1804 (1989).


                                           233
[235] G. F. R. Ellis, D. C. Roberts, D. Solomons and P. K. S. Dunsby, Phys. Rev. D62,
      084004 (2000).

[236] J. Ellis, K. Enqvist, D. V. Nanopoulos and M. Quiros, Nucl. Phys. B277, 231 (1986).

[237] J. Ellis, S. Kalara, K. A. Olive and C. Wetterich, Phys. Lett. B228, 264 (1989).

[238] J. Ellis, D. V. Nanopoulos and M. Quiros, Phys. Lett. B174, 176 (1986).

[239] J. Ellis, D. V. Nanopoulos and S. Sarkar, Nucl. Phys. B259, 175 (1985).

[240] J. Ellis, C. Tsamish and M. Voloshin, Phys. Lett. B194, 291 (1987).

[241] K. Enqvist and M. S. Sloth, Nucl. Phys. B626, 395 (2002).

[242] A. Erdelyi, W. Magnus, F. Oberhettinger and F. G. Tricomi, Higher transcendental
      functions (MacGraw-Hill, New York, 1955), Vol. 3.

[243] R. Fabbri and M. Pollock, Phys. Lett. B125, 445 (1983).

[244] A. Feinstein, gr-qc/0106001, in Fourth Mexican School on Gravity and Mathematical
      Physics, Huatulco, 2000.

[245] A. Feinstein, K. E. Kunze and M. A. Vázquez–Mozo, Classical Quant. Grav. 17, 3599
      (2000).

[246] A. Feinstein, K. E. Kunze and M. A. Vázquez–Mozo, Phys. Lett. B491, 190 (2000).

[247] A. Feinstein, R. Lazkoz and M. A. Vázquez–Mozo, Phys. Rev. D56, 5166 (1997).

[248] A. Feinstein and M. A. Vázquez–Mozo, Phys. Lett. B441, 40 (1998).

[249] A. Feinstein and M. A. Vázquez–Mozo, Nucl. Phys. B568, 405 (2000).

[250] S. Ferrara, C. Kounnas and F. Zwirner, Nucl. Phys. B429, 589 (1994).

[251] F. Finelli and R. Brandenberger, Phys. Rev. D65, 103522 (2002).

[252] F. Finelli and A. Gruppuso, Phys. Lett. B502, 216 (2001).

[253] E. Fischbach and C. Talmadge, Nature 356, 207 (1992).

[254] W. Fischler and L. Susskind, hep-th/9806039.

[255] E. Flanagan, Phys. Rev. D48, 2389 (1993).

[256] E. E. Flanagan, D. Marolf and R. M. Wald, Phys. Rev. D62, 084035 (2000).

[257] S. Foffa and M. Maggiore, Phys. Rev. D58, 023505 (1998).

[258] S. Foffa, M. Maggiore and R. Sturani, Phys. Rev. D59, 043507 (1999).

                                           234
[259] S. Foffa, M. Maggiore and R. Sturani, Nucl. Phys. B552, 395 (1999).

[260] L. H. Ford and L. Parker, Phys. Rev. D16, 1601 (1977).

[261] M. Gaillard, H. Murayama and K. Olive, Phys. Lett. B355, 71 (1995).

[262] M. Galluccio, F. Litterio and F. Occhionero, Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, 970 (1997).

[263] W. D. Garretson, G. B. Field and S. M. Carrol, Phys. Rev. D46, 5346 (1992);

[264] J. Garriga and E. Verdaguer, Phys. Rev. D39, 1072 (1989).

[265] M. Gasperini’s web site at http://www.ba.infn.it/~gasperin

[266] M. Gasperini, Phys. Lett. B163, 84 (1985).

[267] M. Gasperini, Phys. Rev. Lett. 56, 2873 (1986).

[268] M. Gasperini, Phys. Lett. B258, 70 (1991).

[269] M. Gasperini, in Proc. Advances in Theoretical Physics, Vietri, 1990, ed. E. R. Ca-
      ianiello (World Scientific, Singapore 1991), p. 77.

[270] M. Gasperini, Gen. Relat. Gravit. 24, 219 (1992).

[271] M. Gasperini, Phys. Lett. B327, 314 (1994).

[272] M. Gasperini, in Proc. Second Paris Cosmology Colloquium, Observatoire de Paris,
      1994, eds. H. J. de Vega and N. Sanchez (World Scientific, Singapore, 1995), p. 429.

[273] M. Gasperini, in Proc. Birth of the Universe and Fundamental Physics, Rome, 1994,
      ed. F. Occhionero (Springer, New York, 1995), p. 71.

[274] M. Gasperini, in Proc. Third Paris Cosmology Colloquium, Observatoire de Paris,
      1995, eds. H. J. de Vega and N. Sanchez (World Scientific, Singapore, 1996), p. 253.

[275] M. Gasperini, in String Gravity and Physics at the Planck Energy Scale, Proc. Erice
      School, 1995, eds. N. Sanchez and A. Zichichi (Kluwer Acad. Publ., Dordrecht, 1996),
      p. 305.

[276] M. Gasperini, in Proc. It. Conf. on General Relativity and Gravitational Physics,
      Rome, 1996, eds. M. Bassan et al. (World Scientific, Singapore, 1997), p. 181.

[277] M. Gasperini, Phys. Rev. D56, 4815 (1997).

[278] M. Gasperini, in String theory in curved space times, ed. N. Sanchez (World Scientific,
      Singapore 1998), p. 333.

[279] M. Gasperini, in Proc. Fourth Paris Cosmology Colloquium, Observatoire de Paris,
      1997, eds. H. J. de Vega and N. Sanchez (World Scientific, Singapore, 1998), p. 85.

                                            235
[280] M. Gasperini, in Proc. Second Edoardo Amaldi Conference on Gravitational Waves,
      CERN, 1997, eds. E. Coccia et al. (World Scientific, Singapore, 1998), p. 62.

[281] M. Gasperini, Gen. Relat. Gravit. 30, 1703 (1998).

[282] M. Gasperini, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A13, 4779 (1998).

[283] M. Gasperini, in Proc. Fifth Paris Cosmology Colloquium, Observatoire de Paris,
      1998, eds. H. J. de Vega and N. Sanchez (Publications Observatoire de Paris, 1999),
      p. 317.

[284] M. Gasperini, Mod. Phys. Lett. A14, 1059 (1999).

[285] M. Gasperini, Phys. Lett. B470, 67 (1999).

[286] M. Gasperini, Phys. Rev. D61, 87301 (2000).

[287] M. Gasperini, Phys. Lett. B477, 242 (2000).

[288] M. Gasperini, Classical Quant. Grav. 17, R1 (2000).

[289] M. Gasperini, in Gravitational Waves, Proc. SIGRAV School, Centre A. Volta, Como,
      1999), eds. I. Ciufolini et al. (IOP Publishing, Bristol, 2001), p. 280.

[290] M. Gasperini, Int. J. Mod. Phys. D10, 15 (2001).

[291] M. Gasperini, Phys. Rev. D63, 047301 (2001).

[292] M. Gasperini, in Proc. IX Marcel Grossmann Meeting, Rome, 2000, eds. V. G.
      Gurzadyan, R. Jantzen and R. Ruffini (World Scientific, Singapore, 2002), in press.

[293] M. Gasperini, Phys. Rev. D64, 043510 (2001).

[294] M. Gasperini and M. Giovannini, Phys. Lett. B287, 56 (1992).

[295] M. Gasperini and M. Giovannini, Phys. Lett. B282, 36 (1992).

[296] M. Gasperini and M. Giovannini, Classical Quant. Grav. 9, L137 (1992).

[297] M. Gasperini and M. Giovannini, Phys. Lett. B301, 334 (1993).

[298] M. Gasperini and M. Giovannini, Classical Quant. Grav. 10, L133 (1993).

[299] M. Gasperini and M. Giovannini, Phys. Rev. D47, 1519 (1993).

[300] M. Gasperini and M. Giovannini, Classical Quant. Grav. 14, 735 (1997).

[301] M. Gasperini and M. Giovannini, in String theory in curved space times, ed. N. Sanchez
      (World Scientific, Singapore, 1998), p. 249.


                                            236
[302] M. Gasperini, M. Giovannini, K. A. Meissner and G. Veneziano, Nucl. Phys. (Proc.
      Suppl.) B49, 70 (1996).

[303] M. Gasperini, M. Giovannini, K. A. Meissner and G. Veneziano, in String theory in
      curved space times, ed. N. Sanchez (World Scientific, Singapore, 1998), p. 49.

[304] M. Gasperini, M. Giovannini and G. Veneziano, Phys. Rev. D48, R439 (1993).

[305] M. Gasperini, M. Giovannini and G. Veneziano, Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 3796 (1995).

[306] M. Gasperini, M. Giovannini and G. Veneziano, Phys. Rev. D52, 6651 (1995).

[307] M. Gasperini, M. Maggiore, and G. Veneziano, Nucl. Phys. B494, 315 (1997).

[308] M. Gasperini, J. Maharana and G. Veneziano, Phys. Lett. B272, 277 (1991).

[309] M. Gasperini, J. Maharana and G. Veneziano, Phys. Lett. B296, 51 (1992).

[310] M. Gasperini, J. Maharana, and G. Veneziano, Nucl. Phys. B472, 349 (1996).

[311] M. Gasperini, F. Piazza and G. Veneziano, Phys. Rev. D65, 023508 (2001).

[312] M. Gasperini and R. Ricci, Classical Quant. Grav. 12, 677 (1995).

[313] M. Gasperini, R. Ricci and G. Veneziano, Phys. Lett. B319, 438 (1993).

[314] M. Gasperini, N. Sanchez and G. Veneziano, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A6, 3853 (1991)

[315] M. Gasperini, N. Sanchez and G. Veneziano, Nucl. Phys. B 364, 365 (1991).

[316] M. Gasperini and G. Ummarino, Phys. Lett. B266, 275 (1991).

[317] M. Gasperini and C. Ungarelli, Phys. Rev. D64, 064009 (2001).

[318] M. Gasperini and G. Veneziano, Phys. Lett. B277, 256 (1992).

[319] M. Gasperini and G. Veneziano, Astropart. Phys. 1, 317 (1993).

[320] M. Gasperini and G. Veneziano, Mod. Phys. Lett. A8, 3701 (1993).

[321] M. Gasperini and G. Veneziano, Phys. Rev. D50, 2519 (1994).

[322] M. Gasperini and G. Veneziano, Gen. Rel. Grav. 28, 1301 (1996).

[323] M. Gasperini and G. Veneziano, Phys. Lett. B387, 715 (1996).

[324] M. Gasperini and G. Veneziano, Phys. Rev. D59, 43503 (1999).

[325] U. Gen, A. Ishibashi and T. Tanaka, hep-th/0110286.



                                          237
[326] M. Giovannini, Teoria quantistica delle perturbazioni in cosmologia di stringa, PhD
      Thesis (unpublished), University of Turin (1995).

[327] M. Giovannini, Phys. Rev. D55, 595 (1997).

[328] M. Giovannini, Phys. Rev. D56, 631 (1997).

[329] M. Giovannini, Phys. Rev. D56, 3198 (1997).

[330] M. Giovannini, Phys. Rev. D57, 7223 (1998).

[331] M. Giovannini, Phys. Rev. D59, 063503 (1999).

[332] M. Giovannini, Phys. Rev. D59, 083511 (1999).

[333] M. Giovannini, Phys. Rev. D59, 123518 (1999).

[334] M. Giovannini, Phys. Rev. D60, 123511 (1999).

[335] M. Giovannini, Phys. Rev. D62, 123505 (2000).

[336] M. Giovannini, Phys. Rev. D64, 064023 (2001).

[337] M. Giovannini, H. Kurki-Suonio and E. Sihvola, astro-ph/0203430.

[338] M. Giovannini and M. Shaposhnikov, Phys. Rev. D62, 103512 (2000).

[339] G. Giribet and C. Simeone, Mod. Phys. Lett. A16, 19 (2001).

[340] A. Giveon, M. Porrati and E. Rabinovici, Phys. Rep. 244, 77 (1994).

[341] M. Gleiser and J. G. Taylor, Phys. Lett. B164, 36 (1985).

[342] A. S. Goncharov, A. D. Linde and M. I. Vysotsky, Phys. Lett. B147, 279 (1984).

[343] A. Ghosh, G. Pollifrone and G. Veneziano, Phys. Lett. B440, 20 (1998).

[344] A. Ghosh, R. Madden and G. Veneziano, Nucl. Phys. B570, 207 (2000).

[345] D. Grasso and H. R. Rubinstein, Phys. Rep. 348, 163 (12001).

[346] M. B. Green, J. Schwartz and E. Witten, Superstring theory (University Press, Cam-
      bridge, 1987).

[347] B. Greene, The Elegant Universe (W. W. Norton and Co., New York & London,
      1999).

[348] L. P. Grishchuk, Sov. Phys. JETP 40, 409 (1975).

[349] L. P. Grishchuk, Sov. Phys. Usp. 31, 490 (1988).


                                           238
[350] L. P. Grishchuk, Sov. Sci. Rev. E. Astrophys. Space Phys. 7, 267 (1988).

[351] L. P. Grishchuk, in Squeezed states and uncertainty relations, eds. D. Han et al. (NASA
      Conf. Pub. N. 31353, 1992), p. 329.

[352] L. P. Grishchuk, in Proc. 6th Marcel Grossmann Meeting, Kyoto, 1991, ed. H. Sato
      (World Scientific, Singapore, 1992).

[353] L. P. Grishchuk, in Gravitational Waves and Experimental Gravity, Proc. XXXIV
      Rencontres de Moriond, Les Arcs, 1999, eds. J. Tran Thanh Van et al. (World Scien-
      tific, Singapore, 2000).

[354] L. P. Grishchuk and Y. V. Sidorov, Classical Quant. Grav. 6, L161 (1989).

[355] L. P. Grishchuk and Y. V. Sidorov, Phys. Rev. D42, 3413 (1990).

[356] L. P. Grishchuk and M. Solokhin, Phys. Rev. D43, 2566 (1991).

[357] M. McGuigan, Phys. Rev. D38, 3031 (1988).

[358] M. McGuigan, Phys. Rev. D39, 2229 (1989).

[359] M. McGuigan, Phys. Rev. D41, 418 (1990).

[360] A. Guth, Phys. Rev. D23, 347 (1981).

[361] W. Hamilton, in Proc. Second Edoardo Amaldi Conference on Gravitational Waves,
      CERN, 1997, eds. E. Coccia et al. (World Scientific, Singapore, 1998), p. 115.

[362] A. Hammesfahr, Classical Quant. Grav. 18, 4045 (2001).

[363] S. Hanany et al., Astrophys. J. 545, L5 (2000).

[364] E. R. Harrison, Phys. Rev. D1, 2726 (1970).

[365] E. R. Harrison, Phys. Rev. Lett. 30, 188 (1973).

[366] J. B. Hartle and S. W. Hawking, Phys. Rev. D28, 2960 (1983).

[367] S. Hassan and A. Sen, Nucl. Phys. B375, 103 (1992).

[368] S. W. Hawking, Astrophys. J. 145, 544 (1966).

[369] S. W. Hawking, Commun. Math. Phys. 43, 199 (1975).

[370] S. W. Hawking, Nucl. Phys. B239, 257 (1984).

[371] S. W. Hawking and G. F. R. Ellis, The large scale structure of spacetime (University
      Press, Cambridge, 1973).


                                            239
[372] S. W. Hawking and R. Penrose, Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond. A314, 529 (1970).

[373] A. Hebecker and C. Wetterich, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 3339 (2000).

[374] I. Heng, D. Blair, E. Ivanov and M. Tobar, in Proc. Second Edoardo Amaldi Confer-
      ence on Gravitational Waves, CERN, 1997, eds. E. Coccia et al. (World Scientific,
      Singapore, 1998), p. 127.

[375] G. ’t Hooft, in Abdus Salam Festschrift: A Collection of Talks, eds. A. Ali , J. Ellis
      and S. Randjbar-Daemi (World Scientific, Singapore, 1993).

[376] P. Horava and E. Witten, Nucl. Phys. B460, 506 (1996).

[377] P. Horava and E. Witten, Nucl. Phys. B475, 94 (1996).

[378] K. Hotta, K. Kikkawa and H. Kunitomo, Prog. Theor. Phys. 98, 687 (1997).

[379] J. Hough, in Proc. Second Edoardo Amaldi Conference on Gravitational waves, CERN,
      1997, eds. E. Coccia et al. (World Scientific, Singapore, 1998), p. 97.

[380] C. D. Hoyle, U. Schmidt, B. R. Heckel, E. G. Adelberger, J. H. Gundlach, D. J.
      Kapner and H. E. Swanson, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 1418 (2001).

[381] J. H. Hwang, Astrophys. J. 375, 443 (1991).

[382] J. H. Hwang, Astropart. Phys. 8, 201 (1998).

[383] J. H. Hwang and H. Noh, Phys. Rev. D61, 043511 (2000).

[384] J. H. Hwang and H. Noh, Phys. Rev. D65, 124010 (2002).

[385] J. H. Hwang and E. T. Vishniac, Astrophys. J. 382, 363 (1991).

[386] W. Israel, Nuovo Cimento B44, 1 (1966).

[387] W. Johnson and S. Merkowitz, Phys. Rev. Lett. 70, 2367 (1993).

[388] T. Kajita and Y. Totsuka, Rev. Mod. Phys. 73, 85 (2001).

[389] R. Kallosh, L. Kofman and A. Linde, Phys. Rev. D64, 123523 (2001).

[390] R. Kallosh, L. Kofman, A. Linde and A. Tseytlin, Phys. Rev. D64, 123524 (2001).

[391] N. Kaloper, Phys. Rev. D55, 3394 (1997).

[392] N. Kaloper and A. Linde, Phys. Rev. D60, 103509 (1999).

[393] N. Kaloper, I. I. Kogan and K. A. Olive, Phys. Rev. D57, 7340 (1998).

[394] N. Kaloper, A. Linde and R. Bousso, Phys. Rev. D59, 043508 (1999).

                                            240
[395] N. Kaloper, R. Madden and K. A. Olive, Nucl. Phys. B452, 677 (1995).

[396] N. Kaloper, R. Madden and K. A. Olive, Phys. Lett. B371, 34 (1996).

[397] N. Kaloper and K. A. Meissner, Phys. Rev. D56, 7940 (1997).

[398] N. Kaloper and K. A. Olive, Astropart. Phys. 1, 185 (1993).

[399] N. Kaloper and K. A. Olive, Phys. Rev. D57, 811 (1998).

[400] M. Kamionkowski and A. H. Jaffe, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A16, 116 (2001).

[401] M. Kamionkowski, A. Kosowsky and A. Stebbins, Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 2058 (1997).

[402] P. Kanti, J. Rizos and K. Tamvakis, Phys. Rev. D59, 083512 (1999).

[403] V. Kaplunovsky, Phys. Rev. Lett. 55, 1036 (1985).

[404] V. Kaspi, J. Taylor and M. Ryba, Astrophys. J. 428, 713 (1994).

[405] K. Kawabe and the TAMA collaboration, Classical Quant. Grav. 14, 1477 (1997).

[406] S. Kawai, M. Sakagami and J. Soda, Phys. Lett. B437, 284 (1998).

[407] S. Kawai and J. Soda, Phys. Rev. D59, 063506 (1999).

[408] S. Kawai and J. Soda, Phys. Lett. B460, 41 (1999).

[409] M. Kawasaki, N. Sugiyama and T. Tanagida, Phys Rev. D54, 2442 (1996).

[410] A. A. Kehagias and A. Lukas, Nucl. Phys. B477, 549 (1996).

[411] S. Y. Khlebnikov and I. I. Tkachev, Phys. Rev. D56, 653 (1997).

[412] J. Khouri, B. A. Ovrut, P. J. Steinhardt and N. Turok, Phys. Rev. D64, 123522
      (2001).

[413] J. Khouri, B. A. Ovrut, N. Seiberg, P. J. Steinhardt and N. Turok, Phys. Rev. D65,
      086007 (2002).

[414] T. W. Kibble and A. Vilenkin, Phys. Rev. D52, 679 (1995).

[415] K. Kim, Phys. Rev. Lett. 43, 103 (1979).

[416] E. Kiritsis and C. Kounnas, Phys. Lett. B331, 51 (1994).

[417] E. Kiritsis and C. Kounnas, in Proc. Second Paris Cosmology Colloquium, Observa-
      toire de Paris, 1994, eds. H. J. De Vega and N. Sanchez (World Scientific, Singapore,
      1995), p. 500.

[418] E. Kohlprath and G. Veneziano, gr-qc/0203093.

                                           241
[419] E. W. Kolb, D. Lindley and D. Seckel, Phys. Rev. D30, 1205 (1984).

[420] E. W. Kolb and M. S. Turner, The Early Universe (Addison-Wesley, Redwood City,
      CA, 1990).

[421] N. Kozimirov and I. I. Tkachev, Mod. Phys. Lett. A4, 2377 (1988).

[422] L. M. Krauss and M. White, Phys. Rev. Lett. 69, 869 (1992).

[423] K. E. Kunze, Classical Quant. Grav. 16, 3795 (1999).

[424] K. E. Kunze and R. Durrer, Classical Quant. Grav. 17, 2597 (2000).

[425] L. Landau and E. Lifshitz, The classical theory of fields (Pergamon Press, Oxford,
      1962).

[426] F. Larsen and F. Wilczek, Phys. Rev. D55, 4591 (1997).

[427] A. Lawrence and E. Martinec, Classical Quant. Grav. 13, 63 (1996).

[428] Y. Leblanc, Phys. Rev. D38, 3087 (1988).

[429] J. Levin, Phys. Rev. D51, 462 (1995).

[430] D. Lemoine and M. Lemoine, Phys. Rev. D52, 1955 (1995).

[431] M. Lemoine, Phys. Rev. D60, 103522 (1999).

[432] J. Lesgourgues, D. Polarski, S. Prunet and A. A. Starobinski, Astron. Astrophys. 359,
      414 (2000).

[433] A. R. Liddle and D. H. Lyth, Phys. Rep. 231, 1 (1993).

[434] J. E. Lidsey, Phys. Rev. D52, R5407 (1995).

[435] J. E. Lidsey, Phys. Rev. D55, 3303 (1997).

[436] J. E. Lidsey, Classical Quant. Grav. 15, L77 (1999).

[437] J. E. Lidsey, D. Wands and E. J. Copeland, Phys. Rep. 337, 343 (2000).

[438] E. M. Lifchitz and I. M. Kalatnikov, Adv. Phys. 12, 185 (1963).

[439] A. Linde, Phys. Lett. B129, 177 (1983).

[440] A. D. Linde, Sov. Phys. JETP 60, 211 (1984).

[441] A. D. Linde, Particle physics and inflationary cosmology (Harwood, New York, 1990).

[442] A. D. Linde, Phys. Lett. B351, 99 (1995).


                                           242
[443] A. Linde, Phys. Rev. D58, 083514 (1998).

[444] LIGO MIT/Caltech Groups, Research and Development program for Advanced LIGO
      detectors, LIGO-M970107-00-M (September 1997).

[445] C. Lovelace, Phys. Lett. B135, 75 (1984).

[446] H. Lu, S. Mukherji, C. N. Pope and K. W. Xu, Phys. Rev. D55, 7926 (1997).

[447] F. Lucchin and S. Matarrese, Phys. Lett. B164, 282 (1985).

[448] H. Luck and the GEO600 Team, Classical Quant. Grav. 14, 1741 (1997).

[449] A. Lukas and B. A. Ovrut, Phys. Lett. B437, 291 (1998).

[450] A. Lukas, B. A. Ovrut, K. S. Stelle and D. Waldram, Phys. Rev. D59, 086001 (1999).

[451] A. Lukas, B. A. Ovrut, K. S. Stelle and D. Waldram, Nucl. Phys. B552, 246 (1999).

[452] A. Lukas, B. A. Ovrut and D. Waldram, Phys. Lett. B393, 65 (1997).

[453] A. Lukas, B. A. Ovrut and D. Waldram, Nucl. Phys. B495, 365 (1997).

[454] A. Lukas and R. Poppe, Mod. Phys. Lett. A12, 597 (1997).

[455] V. N. Lukash, Sov. Phys. JETP 52, 807 (1980).

[456] D. H. Lyth, Phys. Lett. B526, 173 (2002).

[457] D. H. Lyth and D. Robert, Phys. Rev. D57, 7120 (1998).

[458] D. H. Lyth and E. Stewart, Phys. Rev. D53, 1784 (1996).

[459] D. H. Lyth and D. Wands, Phys. Lett. B524, 5 (2002).

[460] R. Madden, JHEP 0101, 23 (2001).

[461] K. Maeda and M. D. Pollock, Phys. Lett. B173, 251 (1986).

[462] M. Maggiore, Nucl. Phys. B525, 413 (1998).

[463] M. Maggiore, Phys. Rep. 331, 283 (2000).

[464] M. Maggiore and A. Nicolis, Phys. Rev. D62, 024004 (2000).

[465] M. Maggiore and A. Riotto, Nucl. Phys. B548, 427 (1999).

[466] M. Maggiore and R. Sturani, Phys. Lett. B415, 335 (1997).

[467] J. Maharana, S. Mukherji and S. Panda, Mod. Phys. Lett. A12, 447 (1997).


                                          243
[468] J. Maharana, E. Onofri and G. Veneziano, JHEP 9804, 004 (1998).

[469] J. Maharana and J. H. Schwartz, Nucl. Phys. B390, 3 (1992).

[470] MAP’s web site at http://map.gsfc.nasa.gov

[471] A. L. Maroto, Phys. Rev. D64, 083006 (2001).

[472] M. Mars, Phys. Rev. D51, 3899 (1995).

[473] X. Martin and A. Vilenkin, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 2879 (1996).

[474] J. Marto and P. V. Moniz, in Proc. IX Marcel Grossmann Meeting, Rome, 2000, eds.
      V. G. Gurzadyan, R. Jantzen and R. Ruffini (World Scientific, Singapore, 2002), in
      press.

[475] P. Mauskopf et al., Astrophys. J. 536, L59 (2000).

[476] K. A. Meissner, Phys. Lett. B392, 298 (1997).

[477] K. A. Meissner and G. Veneziano, Mod. Phys. Lett. A6, 3397 (1991).

[478] K. A. Meissner and G. Veneziano, Phys. Lett. B267, 33 (1991).

[479] A. Melchiorri, F. Vernizzi, R. Durrer and G. Veneziano, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 4464
      (1999).

[480] L. E. Mendes and A. R. Liddle, Phys. Rev. D60, 063508 (1999).

[481] S. Merkowitz and W. Johnson, Phys. Rev. D51, 2546 (1995).

[482] R. R. Metsaev and A. A. Tseytlin, Nucl. Phys. B293, 385 (1987).

[483] A. D. Miller et al., Astrophys. J. 524, L1 (1999).

[484] A. G. Mirzabekian and G. A. Vilkovisky, Classical Quant. Grav. 12, 2173 (1995).

[485] R. Moessner and M. Trodden, Phys. Rev. D51, 2801 (1995).

[486] S. Mollerach, Phys. Rev. D42, 313 (1990).

[487] T. Moroi and T. Takahashi, Phys. Lett. B522, 215 (2001).

[488] T. Moroi and T. Takahashi, hep-ph/0206026.

[489] M. Mueller, Nucl. Phys. B337, 37 (1990).

[490] V. F. Mukhanov, Sov. Phys. JETP 67, 1297 (1988).

[491] V. F. Mukhanov and R. H. Brandenberger, Phys. Rev. Lett. 68, 1969 (1992).


                                            244
[492] V. F. Mukhanov, H. A. Feldman and R. H. Brandenberger, Phys. Rep. 215, 203
      (1992).

[493] K. Nakao, T. Harada, M. Shibata, S. Kawamura and T. Nakamura, Phys. Rev. D63,
      082001 (2001).

[494] Y. Nambu, Phys. Rev. D63, 044013 (2001).

[495] Y. Nambu, Phys. Rev. D65, 104013 (2002).

[496] Y. Nambu and M. Sasaki, Phys. Rev. D42, 3918 (1990).

[497] C. R. Nappi and E. Witten, Phys. Lett. B293, 309 (1992).

[498] K. S. Narain, Phys. Lett. B169, 41 (1986).

[499] K. S. Narain, M. H. Sarmadi and E. Witten, Nucl. Phys. B279, 369 (1987).

[500] M. Narita, T. Torii and K. Maeda, Classical Quant. Grav. 17, 4597 (2000).

[501] H. B. Nilles, Phys. Rep. 110, 1 (1984).

[502] A. Notari and A. Riotto, hep-th/0205019.

[503] M. Novello, L. A. R. Oliveira, J. M. Salim and E. Elbaz, Int. J. Mod. Phys. D1, 641
      (1993).

[504] M. Novello and J. M. Salim, Phys. Rev. D20, 377 (1978).

[505] I. D. Novikov and A. G. Polnarev, Astron. Zh. 57, 250 (1980) [Sov. Astron. 24, 147
      (1980)].

[506] G. Pallottino, in Proc. Gravitational Waves, Sources and Detectors, Cascina, 1996,
      eds. I Ciufolini and F. Fidecaro (World Scientific, Singapore, 1997), p. 159.

[507] A. Papapetrou, Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond. A209, 248 (1951).

[508] E. N. Parker, Cosmical magnetic fields (Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1979).

[509] J. Peacock and S. Dodds, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 267, 1020 (1994).

[510] P. J. E. Peebles and A. Vilenkin, Phys. Rev. D59, 063505 (1999).

[511] N. Pinto-Neto and R. Colistete Jr., Phys. Lett. A290, 219 (2001).

[512] F. Pegoraro, E. Picasso and L. A. Radicati, J. Phys. A11, 1949 (1978).

[513] R. Penrose, Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond. A284, 159 (1965).

[514] R. Penrose, Phys. Rev. Lett. 14, 57 (1965).

                                           245
[515] R. Penrose, The emperor’s new mind (Oxford University Press, New York, 1989).

[516] S. Perlmutter et al., Astrophys. J. 517, 565 (1999).

[517] S. Perlmutter et al., Nature 391, 51 (1999).

[518] P. Peter and M. Pinto-Neto, hep-th/0203013.

[519] L. O. Pimentel, Mod. Phys. Lett. A14, 43 (1999).

[520] G. Pizzella, Classical Quant. Grav. 14, 1481 (1997).

[521] PLANCK’s web site at
      http://astro.estec.esa.nl/SA-general/Projects/Planck

[522] D. Polarski and A. A. Starobinski, Classical Quant. Grav. 13, 377 (1996).

[523] J. Polchinski, Rev. Mod. Phys. 68, 1245 (1996).

[524] J. Polchinski, String theory, (University Press, Cambridge, 1998).

[525] M. D. Pollock, Nucl. Phys. B324, 187 (1989).

[526] M. D. Pollock, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A7, 4149 (1992).

[527] R. Poppe and S. Schwager, Phys. Lett. B393, 51 (1997).

[528] G. A. Prodi et al., in Proc. Second Edoardo Amaldi Conference on Gravitational
      Waves, CERN, 1997, eds. E. Coccia et al. (World Scientific, Singapore, 1998), p. 148.

[529] K. S. Rama, Phys. Lett. B408, 91 (1997).

[530] L. Randall and R. Sundrum, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 4690 (1999).

[531] L. Randall and S. Thomas, Nucl. Phys. B449, 229 (1995).

[532] B. Ratra, Astrophys. Lett. 391, L1 (1992).

[533] S. J. Rey, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 1929 (1996).

[534] C. E. Reece, P. J. Reiner and A. C. Melissinos, Phys. Lett. A104, 341 (1984).

[535] A. G. Riess et al., Astron. J. 116, 1009 (1998).

[536] W. Rindler, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 116, 6 (1956).

[537] A. Riotto, Phys. Rev. D61, 123506 (2000).

[538] R. C. Ritter et al., Phys. Rev. D42, 977 (1990).

[539] J. Rizos and K. Tamvakis, Phys. Lett. B326, 57 (1994).

                                            246
[540] N. Rosen, Astrophys. J. 297, 347 (1985).

[541] V. A. Rubakov, Phys. Lett. B148, 280 (1984).

[542] V. A. Rubakov, Phys. Lett. B214, 503 (1988).

[543] V. A. Rubakov, M. Sazhin and A. Veryaskin, Phys. Lett. B115, 189 (1982).

[544] J. G. Russo, L. Susskind and L. Thorlacius, Phys. Rev. D46, 3444 (1992).

[545] R. K. Sachs, Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond. A270, 103 (1962).

[546] R. K. Sachs and M. Wolfe, Astrophys. J. 147, 73 (1967).

[547] A. A. Saharian, hep-th/9709188.

[548] V. Sahni, Phys. Rev. D42, 453 (1990).

[549] V. Sahni, H. Feldman and A. Stebbins, Astrophys. J. 385, 1 (1992).

[550] V. Sahni, M. Sami and T. Souradeep, Phys. Rev. D65, 023518 (2002).

[551] N. Sanchez and G. Veneziano, Nucl. Phys. B 333, 253 (1990).

[552] A. K. Sanyal and B. Modak, Phys. Rev. D63, 064021 (2001).

[553] M. Sasaki, Prog. Theor. Phys. 70, 394 (1980).

[554] M. Sasaki, Prog. Theor. Phys. 76, 1036 (1986).

[555] B. S. Sathyaprakash, P. Goswami and K. P. Sinha, Phys. Rev. D33, 2196 (1986).

[556] J. H. Schwarz, Nucl. Phys. Proc. Suppl. 55B, 1 (1997).

[557] V. F. Schwarztmann, JETP Letters 9, 184 (1969).

[558] D. Seckel and M. S. Turner, Phys. Rev. D32, 3178 (1985).

[559] U. Seljak and M. Zaldarriaga, Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 2054 (1997).

[560] A. Sen, Phys. Lett. B271, 295 (1991).

[561] A. Sen, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A9, 3707 (1994).

[562] J. M. M. Senovilla, Phys. Rev. Lett. 64, 2219 (1990).

[563] D. Shadev, Phys. Lett. B317, 155 (1984).

[564] M. Shibata, K. Nakao and T. Nakamura, Phys. Rev. D50, 7304 (1994).

[565] B. L. Shumaker, Phys. Rep. 135, 317 (1986).


                                           247
[566] P. Sikivie, Int. J. Mod. Phys. D3 Suppl., 1 (1994).

[567] G. F. Smooth et al., Astrophys. J. 396, 1 (1992).

[568] SNO Collaboration, nucl-ex/0204008.

[569] SNO Collaboration, nucl-ex/0204009.

[570] A. A. Starobinski, JETP Lett. 30, 682 (1979).

[571] E. D. Stewart and D. H. Lyth, Phys. Lett. B302, 171 (1993).

[572] P. Steinhardt, in Critical problems in physics, edis. V. L. Fitch and D. R. Marlow
      (University Press, Princeton, NJ, 1997).

[573] P. J. Steinhardt and N. Turok, hep-th/0111030.

[574] L. Susskind, J. Math. Phys. 36, 6377 (1995).

[575] J. L. Synge, Relativity: the general theory (North Holland, Amsterdam, 1960).

[576] P. Szekeres, J. Math. Phys. 13, 286 (1972).

[577] T. R. Taylor and G. Veneziano, Phys. Lett. B213, 459 (1988).

[578] R. C. Tolman, Relativity, thermodynamics and cosmology (Dover Publications, New
      York, 1987).

[579] P. Townsend, Phys. Lett. B350, 184 (1995).

[580] A. A. Tseytlin, Mod. Phys. Lett. A6, 1721 (1991).

[581] A. A. Tseytlin, Classical Quant. Grav. 9, 403 (1992).

[582] A. A. Tseytlin and C. Vafa, Nucl. Phys. B372, 443 (1992).

[583] S. Tsujikawa, Phys. Lett. B526, 179 (2002).

[584] S. Tsujikawa and H. Yajima, Phys. Rev. D64, 023519 (2001).

[585] M. S. Turner, Phys. Rev. D55, 435 (1997).

[586] M. S. Turner, Phys. Rep. 333, 619 (2000).

[587] M. S. Turner and A. G. Riess, astro-ph/0106051.

[588] M. S. Turner and E. J. Weinberg, Phys. Rev. D56, 4604 (1997).

[589] M. S. Turner and L. M. Widrow, Phys. Rev. D37, 2473 (1988).

[590] M. S. Turner and F. Wilczek, Phys. Rev. Lett. 65, 3080 (1990).

                                            248
[591] N. Turok, Phys. Rev. Lett. 60, 549 (1988).

[592] N. Turok and S. W. Hawking, gr-qc/9802062.

[593] C. Ungarelli and A. Vecchio, in Gravitational Waves, Proc. Third Edoardo Amaldi
      Conference, CALTECH, Pasadena, 1999, ed. S. Meshkov (AIP Conference Proceed-
      ings 523 (2000)) p. 90.

[594] C. Ungarelli and A. Vecchio, Phys. Rev. D63, 064030 (2001).

[595] T. Vachaspati, Phys. Lett. B265, 258 (1991).

[596] C. van de Bruck, M. Dorca, R. H. Brandenberger and A. Lukas, Phys. Rev. D62,
      123515 (2000).

[597] G. Veneziano, Europhys. Lett. 2, 133 (1986).

[598] G. Veneziano, in Proc. School of Subnuclear Physics, Erice, 1989, ed. A. Zichichi
      (Plenum Press, New York, 1990), p. 199.

[599] G. Veneziano, Phys. Lett. B265, 287 (1991).

[600] G. Veneziano, in Proc. Second Paris Cosmology Colloquium, Observatoire de Paris,
      1994, eds. H. J. de Vega and N. Sanchez (World Scientific, Singapore, 1995), p. 322.

[601] G. Veneziano in String Gravity and Physics at the Planck Energy Scale, Proc. Erice
      School, 1995, eds. N. Sanchez and A. Zichichi (Kluwer Acad. Publ., Dordrecht, 1996),
      p. 285.

[602] G. Veneziano, in Proc. Gravitational Waves: Sources and Detectors, Cascina, 1996,
      eds. I Ciufolini and F. Fidecaro (World Scientific, Singapore, 1997), p.133.

[603] G. Veneziano, Phys. Lett. B406, 297 (1997).

[604] G. Veneziano, Phys. Lett. B454, 22 (1999).

[605] G. Veneziano, in The primordial Universe, Proc. LXXI Les Houches Summer School,
      1999, eds. P. Binétruy, R. Schaeffer, J. Silk and F. David (Springer-Verlag, Berlin,
      2000), p. 581.

[606] G. Veneziano, in The Geometric Universe, eds. L. J. Mason, K. P. Tod, S. T. Tsou
      and N. M. J. Woodhouse (University Press, Oxford, 1998), p. 235.

[607] G. Veneziano, JHEP 0206, 051 (2002).

[608] F. Vernizzi, A. Melchiorri and R. Durrer, Phys. Rev. D63, 063501 (2001).

[609] A. Vilenkin, Phys. Rev. D30, 509 (1984).


                                           249
[610] A. Vilenkin, Phys. Rev. D33, 3650 (1986).

[611] A. Vilenkin, Phys. Rev. D37, 888 (1988).

[612] A. Vilenkin, Phys. Rev. D46, 2355 (1992).

[613] A. Vilenkin, in String Gravity and Physics at the Planck Energy Scale, Proc. Erice,
      School, 1995, eds. N. Sanchez and A. Zichichi (Kluwer Acad. Pub., Dordrecht, 1996),
      p. 345.

[614] S. Vitale, M. Cerdonio, E. Coccia and A. Ortolan, Phys. Rev. D55, 17414 (1997).

[615] R. M. Wald, General relativity (University Press, Chicago, IL, 1984).

[616] D. Wands, Phys. Rev. D60, 023507 (1999).

[617] L. Wang, R. R. Caldwell, J. P. Ostriker and P. J. Steinhardt, Astrophys. J. 530, 17
      (2000).

[618] S. Weinberg, Gravitation and cosmology (Wiley, New York, 1971).

[619] S. Weinberg, Phys. Rev. Lett. 40, 223 (1978).

[620] S. Weinberg, Phys. Rev. Lett. 48, 1303 (1982).

[621] P. S. Wesson, Astron. Astrophys. 151, 276 (1985).

[622] J. A. Wheeler, in Battelle Rencontres, eds. C. De Witt and J. A. Wheeler (Benjamin,
      New York, 1968).

[623] F. Wilczeck, Phys. Rev. Lett. 40, 279 (1978).

[624] E. Witten, Phys. Lett. B149, 351 (1984).

[625] E. Witten, Phys. Rev D44, 314 (1991).

[626] E. Witten, Nucl. Phys. B443, 85 (1995).

[627] E. Witten, Nucl. Phys. B471, 135 (1996).

[628] H. Yajima, K. Maeda and H. Ohkubo, Phys. Rev. D62, 024020 (2000).

[629] S. S. Yazadjiev, Phys. Rev. D63, 063510 (2001).

[630] U. Yurtsever, Phys. Rev. D37, 2803 (1988).

[631] Y. B. Zel’dovich, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 160, 1 (1972).

[632] Y. B. Zeldovich, A. A. Ruzmaikin and D. D. Sokoloff, Magnetic fields in astrophysics
      (Gordon and Breach, New York, 1983).

[633] Y. Zel’dovich and A. A. Starobinski, Sov. Astron. Lett. 10, 135 (1984).


                                           250
