arXiv:hep-th/9906070v2 12 Mar 2001

hep-th/9906070
HUTP-99/A034
IASSNS-HEP-99-52
PUPT-1864

CFT’s From Calabi-Yau Four-folds

Sergei Gukov
Department of Physics, Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544, USA
Cumrun Vafa
Jefferson Laboratory of Physics
Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
Edward Witten
School of Natural Sciences, Institute for Advanced Study
Olden Lane, Princeton, NJ 08540, USA

We consider F/M/Type IIA theory compactified to four, three, or two dimensions on
a Calabi-Yau four-fold, and study the behavior near an isolated singularity in the presence
of appropriate fluxes and branes. We analyze the vacuum and soliton structure of these
models, and show that near an isolated singularity, one often generates massless chiral
superfields and a superpotential, and in many instances in two or three dimensions one
obtains nontrivial superconformal field theories. In the case of two dimensions, we identify
some of these theories with certain Kazama-Suzuki coset models, such as the N = 2

minimal models.

June 1999

1. Introduction
We have learned in recent years that it is fruitful to study singular limits of string
compactifications. In this paper, we consider theories with four supercharges in four,
three, and two dimensions, constructed by considering F -theory, M -theory, and Type
IIA string theory on a Calabi-Yau four-fold with an isolated complex singularity. We
can connect these theories to each other by circle compactifications from four to three to
two dimensions. In addition to the choice of singularity, the description of these theories
depends on certain additional data involving the four-form flux and membrane charge in
M -theory (and related objects in the other theories).
We will analyze the vacuum structure of these theories and the domain walls connecting the possible vacua. We argue that in many cases, the nonperturbative physics near
a singularity generates massless chiral superfields with a superpotential, leading in many
instances, especially in two dimensions or in three dimensions with large membrane charge,
to an infrared flow to a nontrivial conformal field theory. In some cases, we can identify
the theories in question with known superconformal models; for example, Type IIA at a
four-fold An singularity gives an N = 2 Kazama-Suzuki model in two dimensions, as we
argue using the vacuum and soliton structure. More generally, from the A-D-E four-fold
hypersurface singularities with appropriate fluxes, we obtain all the N = 2 Kazama-Suzuki

models [1] at level one. This is a large list of exactly solvable conformal theories, which
includes the N = 2 unitary minimal models. It is quite satisfying that strings in the
presence of singularities captures such a large class of known conformal theories in two

dimensions, and suggests that maybe even in higher dimensions, strings propagating in
singular geometries yield an equally large subspace of conformal theories. Moreover, since
the Kazama-Suzuki models are exactly solvable conformal theories in two dimensions, it
would be interesting to see to what extent its known spectrum and correlation functions
can be extracted from string theory. This would be a natural testing grounds in view
of potential application to higher dimensions where the conformal theories are less well
understood.
Our result gives a relation between singularity theory, as in the Landau-Ginzburg
approach to conformal theories in two dimensions [2-4], and the singularity of internal
compactification geometry. This relation may well extend to non-supersymmetric examples; it would certainly be interesting to explore this.
In section 2, we analyze the fluxes, branes, and vacuum states near a four-fold singularity. In section 3, we show how to compute the spectrum of domain walls (which can
1

also be viewed as strings and kinks in the three and two-dimensional cases) for a special
class of singularities. In section 4, we identify the models derived from A-D-E singularities
with Kazama-Suzuki models at level 1. In section 5, we discuss some additional classes of
singularities on four-folds, and in section 6, we discuss the reinterpretation of some of our
results in terms of branes.

2. Classification Of Vacua
2.1. The G-Field And Domain Walls
For our starting point, we take M -theory on R3 × Y , where Y is a compact eight-

manifold. Soon, we will specialize to the case that Y is a Calabi-Yau four-fold, so as to

achieve supersymmetry. We also will note in section 2.5 the generalization of our remarks
to Type IIA or F -theory compactification on Y .
To fully specify a vacuum on Y , one must specify not just Y but also the topological
class of the three-form potential C of M -theory, whose field strength is G = dC. Roughly
speaking, C-fields are classified topologically by a characteristic class ξ ∈ H 4 (Y ; Z). At

the level of de Rham cohomology, ξ is measured by the differential form G/2π, and we
sometimes write it informally as ξ = [G/2π]. 1
Without breaking the three-dimensional Poincaré symmetries, this model can be gen-

eralized by picking N points Pi ∈ Y and including N membranes with world-volumes of

the form R3 × Pi . More generally, we include both membranes and antimembranes and let

N be the difference between the number of membranes and antimembranes; thus it can be
a positive or negative integer. With Y being compact, the net source of the C-field must
vanish; this gives a relation [6,5]
1
χ
−
N=
24 2
1

Z

G∧G
.
2
Y (2π)

(2.1)

The assertion that ξ takes values in H 4 (Y ; Z) is a bit imprecise, since in general [5] the G-field

is shifted from standard Dirac quantization and ξ is not an element of H 4 (Y ; Z). But the difference
between two C-fields is always measured by a difference ξ − ξ ′ ∈ H 4 (Y ; Z). ξ itself takes values in
a “principal homogeneous space” Λ for the group H 4 (Y ; Z); the relation between H 4 (Y ; Z) and
Λ is just analogous to the relation between H 2 (Y ; Z) and the set of Spinc structures on Y . The
shift in the quantization law of G arises precisely when the intersection form on H 4 (Y ; Z) is not
even. In our examples, this will occur only in section 5, and we will ignore this issue until that
point.

2

If G obeys the shifted quantization condition mentioned in the last footnote, then the right
hand side of (2.1) is always integral [5].
In this construction, models defined using the same Y but different ξ are actually
different states of the same model.2 To show this, it suffices to describe a domain wall
interpolating between models with the same Y and with C-fields of arbitrary characteristic
classes ξ1 and ξ2 . By Poincaré duality, H4 (Y ; Z) = H 4 (Y ; Z). Hence, there is a four-cycle
S ⊂ Y , representing an element of H4 (Y ; Z), such that if [S] ∈ H 4 (Y, Z) is the class that

is Poincaré dual to S, then ξ2 − ξ1 = [S]. Now, consider a fivebrane in R3 × Y whose

worldvolume is W = R2 × S, with R2 a linear subspace of R3 . Being of codimension one

in spacetime, this fivebrane looks macroscopically like a domain wall. Moreover, because

the fivebrane is a magnetic source of G, the characteristic class ξ = [G/2π] jumps by [S]
in crossing this domain wall. Hence if it equals ξ1 on one side, then it equals ξ2 = ξ1 + [S]
on the other side.
Equation (2.1) implies that if ξ jumps in crossing a domain wall, then N must also
jump. Let us see how this comes about. The key is that there is a self-dual three-form T
on the fivebrane with a relation
dT = G|W − 2πδ(∂M ).

(2.2)

where G|W is the restriction of the G-field to the world-volume W , ∂M is the union of all
boundaries of membrane worldvolumes that terminate on W , and δ(∂M ) is a four-form
with delta function support on ∂M . Because the G-field actually jumps in crossing the
fivebrane, it is not completely obvious how to interpret the term G|W . We will assume
that this should be understood as the average of the G-field on the two sides: G|W =
(G1 + G2 )/2. Since the left hand side of (2.2) is zero in cohomology, we get a relation in
cohomology
[∂M ] =

G1 + G2
2(2π)

(2.3)

where [∂M ] is the cohomology class dual to ∂M . We are interested in the case that the
membrane worldvolumes are of the form R3 × Pi , so that their boundaries on W are of the

form R2 × Pi . In evaluating (2.3), we can suppress the common R2 factor, and integrate
over S to get a cohomology relation. The integration converts [∂M ] into N1 − N2 , the
2

This may also be true of models with different Y – as suggested by results of [7] in the

threefold case – but this issue is much harder to explore.

3

change in N in crossing the domain wall or in other words the net number of membranes
whose boundary is on the fivebrane. So
1
N1 − N2 =
2

Z

G1 + G2
1
=−
2π
2
S

Z

G21 − G22
.
(2π)2
Y

(2.4)

Here we have used the fact that [S] = [(G2 − G1 )/2π] to convert an integral over S to one

over Y . Clearly, (2.4) is compatible with the requirement that (2.1) should hold on both

sides of the domain wall.
Incorporation Of Supersymmetry
Now we wish to specialize to the case that Y is a Calabi-Yau four-fold and to look for
vacua with unbroken supersymmetry.
For this, several restrictions must be imposed. The requirements for G, assuming that
one wants unbroken supersymmetry with zero cosmological constant, have been obtained
in an elegant computation [8]. The result is that G must be of type (2, 2) and must be
primitive, that is, it must obey
K ∧ G = 0,

(2.5)

where K is the Kähler form. We will analyze this condition in Appendix I, but for now
we note that it implies that G is self-dual and hence in particular that
Z
G∧G
≥ 0,
2
Y (2π)

(2.6)

with equality only if G = 0.
The second basic consequence of supersymmetry is that N must be positive. Only
membranes and not anti-membranes on R3 × Pi preserve the same supersymmetry that is

preserved by the compactification on the complex four-fold Y .

Given that N must be positive, the relation (2.1) implies that
Z

χ
G∧G
≤
.
2
12
Y (2π)

(2.7)

This inequality together with self-duality implies that, for compact Y , there are only
finitely many choices of G that are compatible with unbroken supersymmetry. For χ
negative, there are none at all.
Energetic Considerations
4

There is another way to understand the result that Φ = N + 8π1 2

R

G ∧ G should

not change in crossing the domain wall. This is based on a finite energy condition. The

condition that the domain wall be flat and have finite tension requires that the energy
density on the two sides of the domain wall should be equal far away from the domain
R
wall. The energy density in the bulk gets contribution from the G flux given by 8π1 2 G∧∗G

and from the membranes by N . For the supersymmetric situation we are considering, G

is self-dual (as explained in Appendix I), i.e., G = ∗G so the energy density is given by
R
N + 8π1 2 G ∧ G, and so its constancy across a domain wall is a consequence of the finite

energy of the domain wall. This is also important in our applications later, as we will
use a BPS formula for the mass of domain walls. Due to boundary terms at infinity,
such formulas are generally not valid for objects of very low codimension in space (the
codimension is one in our case). The cancellation of the boundary terms in question in
our case is again precisely the condition of constancy of Φ across the domain wall.
2.2. Behavior Near A Singularity
So far we have considered the case of a compact smooth manifold Y . Our main interest
in the present paper, however, is to study the behavior as Y develops a singularity. For
practical purposes, it is convenient then to omit the part of Y that is far from the singularity
and to consider a complete but not compact Calabi-Yau four-fold that is developing a
singularity. In fact, some of the singularities we will study – like the An singularities of a
complex surface for very large n – probably cannot be embedded in a compact Calabi-Yau
manifold. Our discussion will apply directly to an isolated singularity of a non-compact
variety.
Hypersurface singularities are an important example and will be our focus in this
paper except in section 5. For example, one of our important applications will be to quasihomogeneous hypersurface singularities. In this case, we begin with five complex variables
za , a = 1, . . . , 5 of degree ra > 0 and a polynomial F (z1 , . . . , z5 ) that is homogeneous of
degree 1. We assume that F is such that the hypersurface F = 0 is smooth except for an
isolated singularity at z1 = . . . = z5 = 0. Then we let X be a smooth deformation of this
singular hypersurface such as
F (z1 , . . . , z5 ) = ǫ

(2.8)

X

(2.9)

with ǫ a constant, or more generally
F (z1 , . . . , z5 ) =

i

5

ti Ai (z1 , . . . , z5 ),

with complex parameters ti and polynomials Ai that describe relevant perturbations of
the singularity F = 0. The singular hypersurface F = 0 admits the U (1) symmetry group
za → eiθra za .

(2.10)

Under this transformation, the holomorphic four-form
Ω=

dz2 ∧ dz3 ∧ dz4 ∧ dz5
∂F/∂z1

has charge
rΩ =

X
a

ra − 1.

(2.11)

(2.12)

The U (1) symmetry in (2.10) is an R-symmetry group if rΩ 6= 0. If the model is to

flow in the infrared to a superconformal field theory, an R-symmetry must appear in the

superconformal algebra; we propose that it is the symmetry just identified. If the Ai have
degrees ri , then the dimensions of the corresponding operators are proportional to ri /rΩ
(in other words, the R-charges normalized so that Ω has R-charge 1). Since the ri are
positive, requiring that the dimensions be positive gives a condition rΩ > 0:
X

ra > 1.

(2.13)

a

We will see the importance of this condition from several points of view.
In what sense is such an X a Calabi-Yau manifold? The holomorphic four-form Ω
defined in (2.11) has no zeroes or poles on X, though it has in a certain sense (using the
compactification described in the next paragraph) a pole at infinity. A theorem of Tian
and Yau [9] asserts, assuming (2.13), that there is a Calabi-Yau metric on X with volume
form
|Ω ∧ Ω|,

(2.14)

and moreover (see the precise statement in eqn. (2.3) of [9]) this metric is asymptotically
conical, that is it looks near infinity like
ds2 = dr 2 + r 2 ds2⊥ .

(2.15)

Here ds⊥ is an “angular” metric, and r is a “radial” coordinate near infinity which scales
under za → λra za as r → λ(Σa ra −1)/4 r. This exponent ensures that the volume form
derived from (2.15) scales like |Ω|2 .

6

To apply the Tian-Yau theorem to the hypersurface X and deduce the statements
in the last paragraph, one writes ra = ba /d with ba relatively prime integers and d a
positive integer. Then one introduces another complex variable w of degree 1/d, and one
compactifies X to the compact variety Y ′ defined by the equation F (zi ) − ǫwd = 0 in
a weighted projective space. The discussion of [9] applies to this situation, with D the
divisor w = 0, and identifies r with a fractional power of |w|.

It is very plausible that if a compact Calabi-Yau manifold Y develops an isolated

hypersurface singularity that is at finite distance on the moduli space, then the CalabiYau metric on Y looks locally like the conelike metric that we have just described on the
hypersurface X.3 For our purposes, we do not strictly need to know that this is true, but
the physical applications are certainly rather natural if it is.
Flux At Infinity
Noncompactness of X leads to several important novelties in the specification of the
model. First of all, flux can escape to infinity, and hence (2.1) no longer holds. Rather, an
extra term appears in (2.1), namely the flux Φ measured at infinity. This flux is a constant
of the motion, invariant under the dynamics which occurs in the “interior” of X. If we
absorb the constant χ/24 in the definition of Φ,4 then we can write the conserved quantity
as

1
Φ=N+
2

Z

G∧G
.
2
X (2π)

(2.16)

We can think of Φ as a constant that must be specified (in addition to giving X) in order
to determine the model. A model with given Φ has various vacuum states, determined by
the values of N and G. For unbroken supersymmetry, both terms on the right hand side
of (2.16) are positive (for the same reasons as in the case of compact X), so there are only
finitely many possible choices of N and G for fixed Φ.
In addition to Φ, there is another quantity that characterizes the definition of the
model – and commutes with the dynamics. For finiteness of the energy, it is reasonable
to require that the flux G vanishes if restricted to ∂X, the region near infinity in X. This
3

There is no claim here that X can be globally embedded in Y , only that the behavior of Y

near its singularity can be modeled by X. Note that the variety Y ′ used in the last paragraph in
relation to the Tian-Yau theorem is not a Calabi-Yau manifold.
4

When X is not compact, χ must in any event be defined by a curvature integral and need

not coincide with the topological Euler characteristic.

7

does not imply that the cohomology class ξ vanishes if restricted to ∂X, but only that its
restriction is a torsion class. Thus, the C-field at infinity is flat, but perhaps topologically
non-trivial. Local dynamics cannot change the behavior at infinity, so the restriction of
ξ to ∂X is another invariant of the local dynamics, which must be specified in defining a
model.
There is another way to see more explicitly how this invariant comes about. For
this, we have to look at precisely what Poincaré duality says in the case of a noncompact
manifold X. Domain walls of the type introduced in section 2.1 are classified by H4 (X; Z),
which classifies the cycles S on which a fivebrane can wrap to make a domain wall. Poincaré
4
4
duality says that this is the same as Hcpct
(X; Z) (where Hcpct
denotes cohomology with

compact support), 5 the rough idea being that if S is a four-cycle determining an element
of H4 (X; Z) (so in particular S is by definition compact), then the Poincaré dual class
[S] is represented by a delta function δ(S) that has compact support. C-fields on X are
4
classified topologically by ξ ∈ H 4 (X; Z). The groups H 4 (X; Z) and Hcpct
(X; Z) that

classify, respectively, topological classes of C-fields and of changes in C-fields in crossing

domain walls are in general different for non-compact X. However, there is always a
natural map
4
i : Hcpct
(X; Z) → H 4 (X; Z)

(2.17)

(by “forgetting” that a class has compact support). Moreover, for hypersurface singu4
larities, Hcpct
(X; Z) and H 4 (X; Z) are lattices, which we will call Γ and Γ∗ respectively.

Poincaré duality in the noncompact case says that Γ and Γ∗ are dual lattices. When the
4
intersection form on Hcpct
(X; Z) has no null vectors, the map i is an embedding, and Γ

can be regarded as a sublattice of its dual lattice Γ∗ . This makes things very simple.
The lattice Γ can actually be described rather simply. In fact, topologically, the
hypersurface X is homotopic to a “bouquet” of four-spheres. 6 H4 (X; Z) is a lattice Γ
with one generator for every four-sphere in the bouquet.
5

The cohomology of X with compact support is generated by closed forms β on X with
compact support, subject to the equivalence relation that β ∼
= β + dǫ if ǫ has compact support.
6

Such a bouquet is, by definition, associated with a tree diagram in which the vertices represent

four-spheres and two vertices are connected by a line if and only if the corresponding four-spheres
intersect. Such a diagram has the form of a simply-laced Dynkin diagram (with vertices for fourspheres and lines for intersections of them), except that the Cartan matrix may not be positive
definite and thus one is not restricted to the A-D-E case.

8

In crossing a domain wall, ξ cannot change by an arbitrary amount, but only by
something of the form i([S]) where [S] is a class with compact support. The possible
values of ξ modulo changes due to the dynamics, that is due to crossing domain walls, are
thus classified by
4
H 4 (X; Z)/i(Hcpct
(X; Z)) = Γ∗ /Γ.

(2.18)

This can be reinterpreted as follows. The exact sequence of the pair (X, ∂X) reads in
part
j
i
4
. . . H 4 (X, ∂X; Z)−→H
(X; Z)−→H 4 (∂X; Z) → H 5 (X, ∂X; Z) → . . . .

(2.19)

i
Here H i (X, ∂X; Z) is the same as Hcpct
(X; Z). By Poincaré duality, H 5 (X, ∂X; Z) =

H3 (X; Z), and this is zero on dimensional grounds for a bouquet of four-spheres. So the
exact sequence implies that
4
H 4 (∂X; Z) = H 4 (X; Z)/i(Hcpct
(X; Z)) = Γ∗ /Γ.

(2.20)

Thus the value of ξ modulo changes in crossing domain walls (the right hand side of (2.20))
can be identified with the restriction of ξ to ∂X (the left hand side).
If the intersection pairing on H4 (X; Z) is degenerate, then we should define Γ to be the
quotient of H 4 (X, ∂X; Z) by the group of null vectors (which can be shown to be precisely
the image in H 4 (X, ∂X; Z) of H 3 (∂X; Z)). The dual Γ∗ is the subgroup of H 4 (X; Z)
consisting of elements whose restriction to ∂X is torsion. With these definitions of Γ and
Γ∗ , everything that we have described above carries over (i embeds Γ as a finite index
sublattice of Γ∗ ; the G-fields, with appropriate boundary conditions, take values in Γ∗ ,
and jump in crossing a domain wall by elements of Γ).
Examples
We will now illustrate these perhaps slightly abstract ideas with examples that will
be important later.
Consider first the simple case that X is a deformation of a quadric singularity:
5
X

za2 = ǫ.

(2.21)

a=1

If we assume that ǫ is real and write za = xa + iya , we get ~x2 −~y 2 = ǫ and ~x · ~y = 0. Setting
p
~u = ~x/ ǫ + ~y 2 , we see that ~u is a unit vector. The subset of X with ~y = 0 is a four-sphere
9

S; since ~y · ~u = 0, X is the cotangent bundle of S. In particular, X is homotopic to the
four-sphere S. This is the case in which the bouquet of spheres is made from just a single
4
sphere. The self-intersection number of S is S · S = 2.7 The lattice Γ = Hcpct
(X; Z) is

generated by [S], but the dual lattice Γ∗ = H 4 (X; Z) is generated by 21 [S] (whose scalar
4
product with S is 1). So H 4 (∂X; Z) = H 4 (X; Z)/Hcpct
(X; Z) = 12 Γ/Γ = Z2 .

A somewhat more sophisticated example is the An−1 singularity in complex dimension
four:
Pn (z1 ) +

5
X

za2 = 0.

(2.22)

a=2

Here Pn (z1 ) is a polynomial of degree n. For simplicity we take
Pn (z1 ) =

n
Y

i=1

(z1 − bi )

(2.23)

with real bi , b1 < b2 < . . . < bn . For i = 1, . . . , n−1, we define a four-sphere Si by requiring
that z1 is real with bi < z1 < bi+1 , and that the zj for j > 1 are all real or all imaginary
4
depending on the value of i modulo two. The Si generate the lattice Γ = Hcpct
(X; Z).

The intersection numbers of the Si are Si2 = 2, Si · Si+1 = 1, with others vanishing. (Si

intersects Si+1 at the single point z1 = bi+1 , zj = 0 for j > 1; Si does not intersect Sj if
|j − i| > 1.) Endowed with this intersection form, Γ is the root lattice of the Lie group
An−1 = SU (n), while the dual lattice Γ∗ = H 4 (X; Z) is the weight lattice. The quotient
is H 4 (∂X; Z) = Γ∗ /Γ = Zn . It can be shown that X is homotopic to the union of the Si ,
which form a “bouquet.” In this case, the bouquet is associated with the Dynkin diagram
of An .
More generally, if H(z1 , z2 , z3 ) is a polynomial in three complex variables that describes a deformation of an A-D-E surface singularity, we can consider the corresponding
surface singularity in complex dimension four:
H(z1 , z2 , z3 ) + z42 + z52 = 0.

(2.24)

The case just considered, with H(z1 , z2 , z3 ) = Pn (z1 ) + z22 + z32 , corresponds to An−1 . (The
appropriate H’s for the other cases are written at the end of section 2.5.) For any of the
7

To compute this, deform S to the four-sphere S ′ defined by y1 = u2 , y2 = −u1 , y3 = u4 ,

y4 = −u3 , y5 = 0. Then S ′ intersects S at the two points u1 = . . . = u4 = 0, u5 = ±1, and each
point contributes +1 to the intersection number. Hence S · S = S · S ′ = 2.

10

A-D-E examples, Γ is the root lattice of the appropriate simply-connected A-D-E group
G, Γ∗ is the weight lattice of G, and the quotient H 4 (∂X; Z) = Γ∗ /Γ is isomorphic to the
center of G. One approach to proving these assertions is to show that they are true for
the middle-dimensional cohomology of the surface H(z1 , z2 , z3 ) = 0, and are unaffected
by “stabilizing” the singularity by adding two more variables with the quadratic terms
z42 + z52 .
2.3. Distance To Singularity And Hodge Structure Of Cohomology
In the present subsection, we return to the case of a compact Calabi-Yau four-fold Y .
We suppose that, when some complex parameters ti are varied, Y develops a singularity
that looks like a quasihomogeneous hypersurface singularity F (z1 , . . . , z5 ) = 0, where the
za have degrees ra > 0 and F is of degree 1. Upon varying the complex structure of Y ,
the hypersurface is deformed to a smooth one which looks locally like
F (z1 , . . . , z5 ) +

X

ti Ai (z1 , . . . , z5 ) = 0.

(2.25)

i

Here the ti are complex parameters, and the Ai are perturbations of the equation.
The first question to examine is whether the singularity at ti = 0 can arise at finite
distance in Calabi-Yau moduli space. The Kähler form on the parameter space is
ω = dti dt

∂2

j

∂ti ∂t

j

K,

(2.26)

where K is the Kähler potential K. On the parameter space of a compact Calabi-Yau
manifold, the Kähler potential of the Weil-Peterson metric is8
Z
K = − ln
Ω ∧ Ω.

(2.27)

Y

We want to analyze a possible singularity of this integral near za = 0 in the limit that the
ti go to zero. If and only if there is such a singularity, the distance to ti = 0 will be infinite
in the metric (2.26). For analyzing this question, the large za behavior, which depends on
how the singularity is embedded in a compact variety Y , is immaterial (as long as there
is some cutoff to avoid a divergence at large za ); we can, for instance, replace Y by the
hypersurface in (2.25) and restrict the integral to the region |za | < 1.
8

The derivation of this formula is just as in the three-fold case; see [10] for an exposition.

11

To determine the small za behavior of the integral, we use a simple scaling. Under
za → λra za , Ω scales like λΣa ra −1 and so the integral in (2.27) scales like |λ|2Σa ra −2 . Small

za corresponds to small λ. Hence the condition that the integral converges at small za is
X
a

ra − 1 > 0.

(2.28)

This is a satisfying result, in that this is the same condition that was needed to get an
R-symmetry with positive charges and to apply the Tian-Yau theorem on existence of
asymptotically cone-like Calabi-Yau metrics.
We will now apply this kind of reasoning to address the following question, whose
importance will become clear: As Y becomes singular, what is the Hodge type of the
“vanishing cohomology,” that is, of the part of the cohomology that “disappears” at the
singularity? We only have to look at middle dimensional cohomology, because the deformation of a hypersurface singularity has cohomology only in the middle dimension.
First let us ask if there is vanishing cohomology of type (4, 0). For this, we normalize
the holomorphic (4, 0)-form Ω of Y in such a way that far from za = 0 it has a limit as
ti → 0. Then we ask if the integral

Z

Y

Ω∧Ω

(2.29)

converges as ti → 0. If the answer is no, then to make the integral converge as ti → 0, we

would have to rescale Ω so that in the limit it vanishes pointwise away from the singularity.
Then in the limit ti → 0, Ω would be a closed four-form that is non-zero but vanishes away

from the singularity. There would thus be vanishing cohomology of type (4, 0). If the
answer is yes, there is no vanishing cohomology of type (4, 0).
We have already seen that convergence of the integral in (2.29) is the condition that
the singularity is at finite distance in moduli space. Hence, singularities that can arise
in the dynamics of a compact Calabi-Yau four-fold have no vanishing cohomology of type
(4, 0).
Now let us look for vanishing cohomology of type (3, 1). The (3, 1) cohomology is
generated by Ωi = DΩ/Dti , where D/Dti is the covariant derivative computed using the
Gauss-Manin connection. To determine if Ωi is a vanishing cycle, we need to examine the
integral

Z

Y

Ωi ∧ Ωi ,

(2.30)

and ask if it is finite as all tj → 0. If not, then to make the integral converge, we would
have to rescale Ωi by a function of the tj , and in the limit tj → 0, Ωi would represent a
12

nonzero (3, 1) cohomology class that vanishes away from the singularity, or in other words
a piece of the vanishing cohomology of type (3, 1). The integral (2.30) is more conveniently
written as

∂2
∂ti ∂ti

Z

Y

Ω ∧ Ω.

(2.31)

Whether this integral converges can, again, be determined by scaling. If the function Ai
in (2.25) scales under za → λra za as λsi , then ti scales like λ1−si and (2.31) scales like

|λ|wi with

wi = 2

X
a

!

ra + s i − 2 .

(2.32)

Vanishing (3, 1) cohomology arises when wi ≤ 0, so that the integral in (2.31) diverges

near z = 0. The most dangerous case is for Ai = 1, si = 0. The condition that wi > 0 for
all i, so that there is no vanishing (3, 1) cohomology, is thus
X

ra > 2.

(2.33)

a

We can classify the models that obey this condition. Consider a Landau-Ginzburg
model with chiral superfields Φa , a = 1, . . . , 5 and superpotential F (Φ1 , . . . , Φ5 ). If Φa have
P5
degree ra and F has degree one, then the central charge of this model is b
c = a=1 (1 −
P
2ra ) = 5 − 2 a ra . The condition (2.33) thus amounts to9
c < 1.
b

(2.34)

F (z1 , . . . , z5 ) = H(z1 , z2 , z3 ) + z42 + z52 ,

(2.35)

The singularities that obey this condition are the A-D-E singularities. They are given, in
a suitable set of coordinates, by

where H(z1 , z2 , z3 ) = 0 is the equation of an A-D-E surface singularity.
Application To Hypersurface
We have developed this discussion for the case of a compact Calabi-Yau manifold Y
that develops a hypersurface singularity, but it is more in the spirit of the present paper
to decompactify Y and focus on the hypersurface itself, that is to consider M -theory on
9

Note that in terms of b
c the condition that the local singularity of the fourfold be at finite

distance in moduli space (2.28) is that b
c < 3, which generalizes for an n-fold singularity to b
c < n−1.

13

R3 × X, where X is a hypersurface that develops the given singularity. This is the natural
framework for studying M -theory near a singularity, with extraneous degrees of freedom
decoupled. Let us therefore now explain the significance of the above results for this case.
P
If we work on the noncompact hypersurface, the condition that a ra + si > 2, which
R
ensures that there is not a divergence of |Ωi |2 near za = 0, also ensures that there is
such a divergence near za = ∞. The large za divergence means that, in M -theory on
R3 × X, the modes that deform the singularity of X have divergent kinetic energy and

are not dynamical. They correspond, instead, to coupling constants of the theory near the
singularity; they can be specified externally as part of the definition of the problem.
In the A-D-E examples, the complex structure modes are all non-dynamical in this
sense. For other examples, positivity of (2.32) does not hold for all i, and therefore some of
the complex structure deformations of X are dynamical; they vary quantum mechanically
in the theory at the singularity. Only those modes for which wi > 0 can be specified
externally and represent coupling constants.
Now let us consider the Hodge type of the G-field in the hypersurface case. For
unbroken supersymmetry in flat spacetime, G must be a harmonic L2 form of type (2, 2)
[8]. It must, as well, be integral and “primitive.”
For hypersurface singularities with asymptotically conical metrics of the type predicted
by the Tian-Yau theorem, the condition that G be a harmonic L2 form is a mild one in
the following sense. For an asymptotically conical metric on a manifold X, one expects
i
the space of L2 harmonic forms of degree i to be isomorphic to the image of Hcpct
(X; R)

in H i (X; R). For hypersurface singularities of complex dimension four, there is only fourdimensional cohomology, so we expect L2 harmonic forms of degree four only. Assuming
4
i
there are no null vectors in Hcpct
(X), the image of Hcpct
(X; R) in H i (X; R) is all of

H i (X; R), so one expects that all of the four-dimensional cohomology is realized by L2
harmonic forms.
What about the requirement that G be primitive? Primitiveness means that K ∧ G =

0, where K is the Kähler form. If G is an L2 harmonic four-form on a manifold whose L2

harmonic forms are all four-forms, then K ∧ G is automatically zero (if not zero, it would

be an L2 harmonic six-form). Thus, for singularities of this type, the condition that G
14

should be primitive is automatically obeyed. 10 In section 5, we will examine a singularity
of a different sort for which primitiveness of G is an important constraint.
The remaining constraint that we have not examined yet is a severe constraint in the
case of hypersurface singularities. This is the condition that G should be of type (2, 2). For
A-D-E singularities, as we have seen above, the vanishing cohomology is all of type (2,2),
P
so the L2 harmonic forms have this property. For other singularities, with a ra < 2,
there is vanishing cohomology of types (3,1), (2,2), and (1,3). Under such conditions, it
is generically very hard to find a non-zero four-form that is of type (2,2) and integral.
Once an integral four-form G is picked, requiring that it be of type (2, 2) will generally put
restrictions on the complex structure of X. Since some of the complex structure modes
are dynamical whenever there is vanishing (3,1) cohomology, the restriction on complex
structure that is entailed in making G be of type (2,2) is likely to play an important role in
the dynamics of these models. In this paper, to avoid having to deal with the dynamical
complex structure modes and the Hodge structure of the singularity, we will study in detail
only the A-D-E singularities. (For fourfold examples where moduli are dynamically frozen
see [11].)
Here is another way to see the distinguished nature of the A-D-E singularities. As
we explain in Appendix I, the intersection form on H 4 (X, Z) is positive definite on the
primitive cohomology of type (2,2), and negative definite on the primitive cohomology of
types (3,1) and (1,3). Hence, in particular, having the primitive cohomology be entirely of
type (2,2) is equivalent to positive definiteness of the intersection form on H 4 (X; Z). For
an intersection form specified by a bouquet of spheres to be positive definite is a condition
that singles out the A-D-E Dynkin diagrams, so again we see that the A-D-E singularities
are the ones with vanishing cohomology that is entirely of type (2,2).
2.4. Interpretation Of Constraints On G
Since the constraints on G found in [8] have played an important role in this discussion,
we will pause here to attempt to gain a better understanding of these constraints.
We consider compactification of M -theory on a compact four-fold Y . We first suppose
that G is zero. Variations of the Calabi-Yau metric of Y arise either from variations of
10

A different explanation of this is as follows. In section 2.2, we compactified X to a complete

but non-Calabi-Yau variety Y ′ by adding a divisor D at infinity. D is an ample divisor, and the
“primitive” cohomology in this situation is the cohomology that vanishes when restricted to D.
This is certainly so for the vanishing cohomology, whose support is far from D.

15

the complex structure or variations of the Kähler structure. The variations of the complex
structure are parametrized classically by complex parameters ti , which we promote to chiral
superfields Ti . If hp,q is the dimension of the Hodge group H p,q (Y ), then the number of
Ti is h3,1 . The Kähler structure is parametrized classically by h1,1 real parameters ki .
Compactification of the C-field on Y gives rise to h1,1 U (1) gauge fields ai on R3 whose
duals are scalars φi that combine with the ki to make h1,1 chiral superfields that we may
call Ki .
If G = 0, the expectation values of the Ti and Ki are arbitrary, in the supergravity
approximation to M -theory. (Instantons can lift this degeneracy [12].) For non-zero G,
R
this is not so. After picking an integral four-form G (which must be such that X G∧G > 0
or the equations we are about to write will have no solutions), we must adjust the complex
structure of X so that
G0,4 = G1,3 = 0,

(2.36)

and the Kähler structure of X so that
G ∧ K = 0.

(2.37)

In (2.36), Gp,q denotes the (p, q) part of G.
We want to describe an effective action for the Ti and Kj that accounts for (2.36)
R
and (2.37). Since supersymmetric actions of the general kind d4 θ(. . .) do not lift vacuum

degeneracies, we look for F-term interactions. Thus, we want a superpotential W (Ti )
f (Kj ) that will account
that will account for (2.36), and an analog of a superpotential W

for (2.37). In three dimensions, the fields Kj are in vector multiplets, and the function
f (Kj ) is related by supersymmetry to Chern-Simons couplings for those multiplets. We
W
will not try to work out the full details of this here. Upon dimensional reduction to two
f (Kj ) becomes the twisted chiral
dimensions, the Kj become twisted chiral multiplets and W
f a superpotential.
superpotential. Therefore, we will somewhen loosely call W

To obtain (2.36), we propose to let Ω be a holomorphic four-form on Y , and take
1
W (Ti ) =
2π

Z

Y

Ω ∧ G.

(2.38)

This object is not, strictly speaking, a function of the Ti but a section of a line bundle over
the moduli space M of complex structures on Y (on which the Ti are coordinates), since
16

it is proportional to the choice of Ω. Let L be the line bundle over M whose fiber is the
space of holomorphic four-forms on Y . The Kähler form of M can be written
ω = −∂∂ln

Z

Y

Ω ∧ Ω,

(2.39)

in other words it is ∂∂ ln |Ω|2 for Ω any section of L, and this means [13] that W should

be a section of L. Thus, the linear dependence on Ω in (2.38) is the right behavior
of a superpotential. In supergravity with four supercharges, the condition for unbroken

supersymmetry in flat space is W = dW = 0. With W as in (2.38), the condition W = 0 is
that G0,4 = 0. Also, since the objects dΩ/dti generate H 3,1 (Y ), the condition dW = 0 is
that G1,3 = 0. So we have found the supersymmetric interaction that accounts for (2.36).
Another way to justify (2.38) is to consider supersymmetric domain walls. The tension
of a domain wall obtained by wrapping a brane on a four-cycle S is the absolute value of
R
Ω. If G changes from G1 to G2 in crossing the domain wall, then G2 − G1 = 2π[S], so
S

this integral is

1
2π

Z

X

Ω ∧ (G2 − G1 ).

(2.40)

In a theory with four supercharges, the tension of a supersymmetric domain wall is the
absolute value of the change in the superpotential W . So (2.40) should be the change in
W in crossing the domain wall, a statement that is clearly compatible with (2.38).
In a similar spirit, one can readily guess the interaction responsible for (2.37):
f (Ki ) =
W

Z

X

K ∧ K ∧ G.

(2.41)

Here K is a complexified Kähler class whose real part is the ordinary Kähler class K. The
f = 0 is K ∧ G = 0, whose real part is (2.37). W
f = 0 is a consequence of this,
condition dW

and imposes no further condition.

In M -theory on a compact Calabi-Yau four-fold Y , near a hypersurface singular-

ity, the relation of the change in the superpotential in crossing a domain wall to (2.40)
shows that W cannot vanish in all vacua. In the first version of the present paper it
was conjectured that vacua with non-zero W correspond to supersymmetric AdS compactifications. However, a more careful analysis in the revised Appendix II (triggered by
comments of J. Polchinski) shows that four-fold compactifications with G0,4 6= 0 lead to
17

non-supersymmetric theories which are classically scale invariant11 , the so-called “no-scale
models”. In fact, since the supersymmetry conditions (2.36) and (2.37) are invariant under overall rescaling of the metric on Y , this conclusion is needed for the superpotential
f (Kj ) to describe correctly the effective dynamics of M-theory on
W (Ti , Kj ) = W (Ti ) + W

a Calabi-Yau four-fold with a G-flux. Going to a non-compact manifold has the effect of
decoupling gravity and allows us to avoid this problem in the present discussion.

Going back to supersymmetric compactifications to R3 , it is interesting to compactify
one of the directions in R3 on a circle and consider Type IIA on R2 × Y . The above

analysis carries over immediately for supersymmetric vacua with a nonzero value of the
Ramond-Ramond four-form G. However, in Type IIA string theory, in view of mirror
symmetry and other T -dualities, one naturally thinks that one should construct a more
general effective superpotential to incorporate the possibility of turning on a full set of
Ramond-Ramond fields, and not just the four-form. Indeed, the mirror of G0,4 would be
the RR zero-form (responsible [14] for the massive deformation of Type IIA supergravity),
and the mirror of G1,3 would be the RR two-form. This is under investigation [15].
Physical Interpretation
We will now discuss the physical interpretation of the superpotentials that we have
computed.
We have computed the superpotential as a function of the superfields Ti and Kj with
all other degrees of freedom integrated out. For Y a large, smooth Calabi-Yau four-fold,
this is a very natural thing to do, since the superfields Ti and Kj are massless if G = 0,
while other superfields are massive. However, we have argued that as one approaches
a singularity, there are different vacuum states in the theory at the singularity that are
specified by different choices of the G-field. We will interpret the theory near the singularity
as a theory of dynamical chiral fields Φα such that the critical points of the superpotential
as a function of Φα are given by the possible choices of G-field. Thus, a more complete
c (Φα ; Ti , Kj ), such that
description of the theory would involve a superpotential function W
f (Kj ) is obtained by extremizing W
c with respect
the function W (Ti , Kj ) = W (Ti ) + W

to the Φα . For fixed choices of Ti and Kj , the extremization with respect to Φα has
11

In general, quantum corrections presumably break the classical scale invariance which changes

the normalization of the Lagrangian. For instance, five-brane instantons are expected to modify
the effective superpotential and cause the model to roll down to a supersymmetric vacuum with
negative cosmological constant.

18

different solutions, corresponding to the different choices of G. It is very difficult to see
the superfields Φα explicitly, but for suitable examples we will identify the superpotential
c (Φα ; Ti , Kj ) in section 3 by studying the soliton structure.
function W

2.5. Analogs For Type IIA And F -Theory

We have formulated the discussion so far in terms of M -theory on R3 × Y , with Y

a Calabi-Yau four-fold, but there are close analogs for Type IIA on R2 × Y and (if Y is
elliptically fibered) for F -theory on R4 × Y .

The analysis of [8] carries over to Type IIA, with G now understood as the Ramond-

Ramond four-form field. Our analysis of the vacuum structure also carries over readily to
this case. One obvious change is that domain walls are now constructed from four-branes
(with world-volume R × S ⊂ R2 × Y ). Another obvious change is that, in Type IIA, the

space-filling membranes that contribute to the formula (2.16) for the flux at infinity are
replaced by space-filling fundamental strings. Also, in the Type IIA case, alongside the
Ramond-Ramond four-form, one would want to incorporate the Ramond-Ramond zeroform and two-form, as we have discussed briefly in section 2.4.
In going to F -theory, the space-filling membranes that contribute to the flux Φ at
infinity are replaced by space-filling threebranes. Also we need to discuss the F -theory
analog of the G-field. Let Y be a four-fold that is elliptically fibered over a base B. Let θ i ,
i = 1, 2, be a basis of integral harmonic one-forms on the fibers, and let χ be an integral
two-form generating the two-dimensional cohomology of the fibers. Then a four-form G
on Y has at the level of cohomology an expansion
G=g+p∧χ+

X
i

Hi ∧ θ i ,

(2.42)

where g, p, and Hi are respectively forms of degree 4, 2, and 3 on B. (Hi is a three-form on
B with values in the one-dimensional cohomology of the fibers, while g and p are ordinary
four- and two-forms on B.) If G is primitive, then it is in particular self-dual (see Appendix
I). For G to be integral, g and p must be integral. Self-duality of G gives a relation between
g and p which, in the limit that the area of the fibers of Y → B is very small, is impossible
to obey if g and p are non-zero and integral. Hence, the surviving part of G in the F -theory

limit is contained in the Hi , which are interpreted physically as the Neveu-Schwarz and
Ramond-Ramond three-form field strengths of Type IIB superstrings. With g = p = 0, G
19

is an element of the primitive cohomology of Y that is odd under the involution that acts
as −1 on the elliptic fibers and trivially on the base.

In terms of a Type IIB description, we have the following structure. Let H NS , H R

denote the NS and Ramond three-form field strengths. Let B denote the base of F-theory
“visible” to type IIB. Consider
H + = H R − τ H NS
H − = H R − τ H NS
We view τ as varying over B with monodromies around the loci of seven-branes by SL(2, Z)
transformations
τ→

aτ + b
cτ + d

Under such transformations
H + → (cτ + d)−1 H +
H − → (cτ + d)−1 H −
A supersymmetric configuration in this context is obtained by choosing an integral (1, 2)
form on the base, H, well defined modulo transformation by (cτ + d)−1 around the 7branes. Alternatively, H is a section of Ω1,2 ⊗ L where L is a line bundle over B whose
first chern class is c1 (L) = −12c1 (B). Then we identify
H + = H,

H− = H

Moreover we require that H ∧ k = 0 where k denotes the Kähler class of B. In this case a
given model is specified by fixing

1
Φ=N+ 2
4π

Z

1
H ∧H
B τ2

where N denotes the number of D3 branes.
To describe the domain walls, recall that one can interpret F -theory on R4 × Y in

terms of Type IIB on R4 × B with (p, q)-sevenbranes on a certain locus L ⊂ B. Domain
walls across which the Hi jump are described by a five-brane wrapped on R3 ×V ⊂ R4 ×B

with V a three-cycle in B. The (p, q) type of the five-brane varies as V wraps around the

discriminant locus in B.
20

This is a rather complicated structure in general, but to study the local behavior
near a singularity, it simplifies considerably. One reason for this is that near an isolated
singularity, one can replace B by C3 . If we pick coordinates z1 , z2 , z3 on C3 , then the
elliptic fibration over C3 can be described very explicitly by a Weierstrass equation for
additional complex variables x, y:
y 2 = x3 + f (z1 , z2 , z3 )x + g(z1 , z2 , z3 ).

(2.43)

The fibers degenerate over a singular locus L which is the discriminant of the cubic, given
by ∆ = 0, where
∆ = 4f 3 (z1 , z2 , z3 ) + 27g 2 (z1 , z2 , z3 ).

(2.44)

A singular behavior of the elliptic fibration Y just corresponds in this language to a singularity of the hypersurface L ⊂ C3 . We are interested in a singular point of L at which

4f 3 + 27g 2 = 0 but f and g are not both zero.12 Near such a singular point, the detailed
construction of ∆ in terms of f and g is irrelevant, and and one can regard L as a fairly
generic deformation of a hypersurface singularity ∆ = 0.
Actually, the full structure of (p, q) sevenbranes also simplifies in this situation. The
deformation of an isolated surface singularity is topologically a bouquet of two-spheres,
and in particular simply-connected. Hence, there is no monodromy around which the type
of brane can change; the (p, q) type of the sevenbrane is fixed, and one can think of it (for
example) as a D7-brane. Thus, the F -theory analog of a Calabi-Yau fourfold singularity is
a more elementary-sounding problem: the study of a D7-brane in R10 = R4 × C3 whose
worldvolume is R4 × L, where L ⊂ C3 is developing a singularity.

Now, let us describe the vacuum states and domain walls in this context. The D7-brane

supports a U (1) gauge field, whose first Chern class is an element of H 2 (L; Z). This group
is a lattice Γ∗ , whose rank is the number of two-spheres in the bouquet. A D5-brane can
end on a D7-brane; its boundary couples magnetically to the gauge field on the D7-brane.
Hence the domain walls across which the first Chern class jumps are built from fivebranes of
topology R3 × V , where V is a three-manifold in C3 whose boundary lies in L. In crossing

such a domain wall, the first Chern class jumps by the cohomology class [∂V ], which is
2
an element of Γ = H2 (L; Z) = Hcpct
(L; Z). Poincaré duality for noncompact manifolds
12

Singularities with f and g both zero are composite 7-branes of various types (the order of

vanishing of discriminant would be bigger than 1). For such cases the simplifications described in
the text do not arise and the full structure of (p, q) sevenbranes is relevant.

21

2
asserts that Γ and Γ∗ are dual, and13 the natural map i : Hcpct
(L; Z) → H 2 (L; Z) gives

an embedding of Γ in Γ∗ . Thus we have a familiar situation: the vacuum is determined

by a point in a lattice Γ∗ , and in crossing a domain wall it can jump by an element of a
sublattice Γ. Γ is endowed with an integral quadratic form (the intersection pairing), and
as the notation suggests, Γ∗ is the dual lattice of Γ with respect to this pairing.
The A-D-E singularities will furnish important examples in the present paper, for
reasons that we have already explained. Thus, let us explain how they arise in the F theory context. An example of an elliptic four-fold fibration Y with an isolated singularity
is given by the following Weierstrass equation:
y 2 = x3 − 3a2 x + (H(z1 , z2 , z3 ) + 2a3 ).

(2.45)

Here a is an arbitrary non-zero constant, and H is a quasihomogeneous polynomial describing a singularity in three variables at z1 = z2 = z3 = 0. If we shift x to x + a, the
equation becomes
y 2 = x3 + 3ax2 + H(z1 , z2 , z3 ),

(2.46)

and this makes it obvious that the singularity of the elliptic fibration is obtained by “stabilizing” the surface singularity H = 0 by adding the quadratic terms 3a2 x2 − y 2 (the

x3 term is irrelevant near the singularity, which is at x = y = 0). The equation for the
discriminant locus L ⊂ C3 reduces to H = 0 (plus higher order terms that are irrelevant

near the singularity). So the singularity of the elliptic four-fold is just the “stabilization”
of the singularity L. To obtain the A-D-E singularities, for both the surface L and the
four-fold Y , we need only select the appropriate H:

13

H = z1n + z22 + z32

An−1

H = z1n + z1 z22 + z32

Dn+1

H = z13 + z24 + z32

E6

H = z13 + z1 z23 + z32

E7

H = z13 + z25 + z32

E8 .

(2.47)

If there are null vectors in Γ, there is a slightly more elaborate story as mentioned in section

2.2.

22

2.6. Conformal Field Theory: First Results
Given Type IIA, M -theory, or F -theory on a singular geometry, one natural question
is whether a non-trivial conformal field theory arises in the infrared.
In one situation, an affirmative answer to this question is strongly suggested by recent
literature. This is the case of M -theory at a quasihomogeneous four-fold singularity (for
the present discussion this need not be a hypersurface singularity) with a large value of
the conserved quantity Φ that was introduced in section 2.2:
1
Φ=N+
2

Z

G∧G
.
2
X (2π)

(2.48)

We suppose that the four-fold X is a cone over a seven-manifold Q. Consider M -theory
on R3 × X, with a specified (flat) C-field at infinity that we call C∞ , and with a very large
number of membranes near the singularity, such that the total membrane charge (including
the contribution of the C-field) is Φ.

This system is believed [16-18] to be described

in the infrared by a conformal field theory that is dual to M -theory on AdS4 × Q, with

a constant curvature (but topologically trivial) C-field on AdS4 that depends on Φ, and

a flat but topologically nontrivial C-field on Q that is equal to C∞ . For a special case in
which the role of C∞ has been analyzed (for Q = RP7 ) see [19].
The AdS4 dual of this CFT depends only on what one can measure on Q, that is
C∞ and Φ, and not the detailed way of decomposing Φ in terms of N and G as in (2.48).
That decomposition arises if one makes a deformation of the theory, deforming X to a
smooth hypersurface. M -theory on R3 × X with X such a smooth hypersurface has vacua

corresponding to all choices of N and G obeying (2.48). When X develops a singularity,
the G-field apparently “disappears” at the singularity, and the decomposition of Φ into

membrane and G-field terms is lost.
Note that the vacua with N 6= 0 do not have a mass gap even after deforming to smooth

X. There are at least massless modes associated with the motion of the membranes on X.
To get a theory that after deformation of the parameters flows in the infrared to massive
vacua only, one must set Φ to the smallest possible value for a given value of C∞ , so that
after deforming to a smooth X, N will be zero for all vacua. We recall that C∞ determines
a coset in Γ∗ /Γ. To get a massive theory, Φ must equal the minimum of
1
2

Z

G∧G
,
2
X (2π)
23

(2.49)

with G running over the elements of the coset of Γ∗ /Γ determined by C∞ ; the massive
vacua are in correspondence with the choices of G that achieve the minimum.
Our goal in the next two sections will be to analyze, for the A-D-E singularities, the
“massive” models just described. The analysis will be made by analyzing the domain wall
structure, or, as it is usually called in two dimensions, the soliton structure. To justify the
analysis, we need to know that there are no quantum corrections to the classical geometry
(which we will use to find the solitons). Such corrections would come from appropriate
instantons. For example, for Type IIA on a Calabi-Yau threefold near the conifold singularity, the Euclidean D2 brane instantons wrapped around the S3 in the conifold smooth out
the singular classical geometry [20-22]. Likewise, in M -theory compactifications on suitable Calabi-Yau four-folds, a superpotential is generated by wrapped Euclidean fivebranes
[12]. Such effects, however, are absent in the examples we are considering. For example, in
the F -theory, we are really studying, as we have explained above, a sevenbrane on L ⊂ C3 .

Since the C3 has no non-trivial cycles, the relevant instantons will have to end on L, in
order to have finite action. For the instanton to affect the quantum moduli space it has to
be BPS, which in particular requires that the boundary of the instanton be a non-trivial
compact cycle in L. In Type IIB string theory the only possible candidate instantons
which could end on a sevenbrane are fivebranes and onebranes (of appropriate (p, q) type).
Viewing them as instantons, their boundaries would be five- and one-dimensional respectively. So if L has no non-trivial compact five- or one-dimensional cycles, then there are no
instantons, and quantum corrections do not modify the singular classical geometry. In our
case, L, whose compact geometry consists of a bouquet of two-spheres, has only two-cycles,
so there are no instantons. This is to be contrasted with the seemingly similar problem of
F -theory on a Calabi-Yau threefold. In that case, L is a complex curve, with non-trivial
one-cycles; instanton one-branes can and do modify the classical geometry. This is in fact
the F -theory version of the description of the corrections to conifold geometry in Type
IIA compactification (and reduces to it upon compactification on T2 ). For F -theory on a
four-fold, if the singularity of the surface L is not isolated, then it would generically also
have non-trivial one-cycles and would thus receive corrections.
For M -theory or Type IIA near a four-fold hypersurface singularity, a similar statement holds. In this case, the local geometry of the deformed singularity has non-trivial
four-cycles only. Thus there is no room for instantons, i.e. wrapped Euclidean M2- or
M5-branes, which would require non-trivial three or six-cycles on X. Thus the classical
singularity survives quantum corrections.
24

Thus, to analyze the small Φ theories, we will look for supersymmetric domain walls
using the classical geometry near the singularity. The domain walls are constructed from
branes whose volumes vanish as the hypersurface X becomes singular, so their tensions go
to zero. Thus one can reasonably hope to get a description in terms of an effective theory
that contains only light degrees of freedom and generates these domain walls. In fact,
for the massive models derived from A-D-E singularities, we will propose a description in
terms of an effective superpotential for a certain set of chiral superfields that generate the
same soliton structure. This description will make clear that one should expect flow to a
non-trivial IR conformal field theory in the two-dimensional cases, and in a few cases in
three dimensions.
The basic strategy for identifying a supersymmetric theory based on its BPS soliton
structure is the classification approach of [23] to N = 2 supersymmetric theories in two
dimensions. Consider a theory with N = 2 supersymmetry in two dimensions with k
vacua, and consider the integral k × k matrix S given by
S =1−A

(2.50)

where 1 represents the identity matrix and A is a strictly upper triangular matrix whose
Aij entry for i < j is the number of nearly massless BPS solitons interpolating between
the i-th sector and the j-th sector weighted with the index (−1)F F [24], i.e.
Aij = Trij−solitons (−1)F F.
It was argued that this massive deformation comes from a CFT in the UV limit with
central charge b
c and k chiral fields with R-charges qi which satisfy
Eigenvalues(S −t S) = exp[2πi(qi − 21 b
c)]

(even the integral part of qi can be determined from Aij [23]). This is a strong restriction,
and in case of deformations of minimal models, the solitons completely characterize the
conformal theory. In other words, any theory which upon mass deformation has the same
solitonic structure as that for a massive deformation of a minimal model is equivalent to
it! For non-minimal models, the relation above between the spectrum of the solitons and
the charges of chiral fields is still a very powerful connection and in particular fixes the
central charge of the corresponding conformal theory.
25

Above two dimensions, the domain wall or soliton analysis still identifies an effective
superpotential, but it is less common for a theory with a given superpotential to flow to a
nontrivial IR conformal field theory. For instance, a theory with a single chiral superfield
Φ and superpotential W = Φn is believed to flow to a nontrivial CFT in two dimensions
for all n > 2, while in three dimensions this is expected only for n = 3 [25], and in four
dimensions, it is believed to flow to a trivial IR theory for all n. In any event, our analysis
will identify the nonperturbative massless fields and superpotential near the singularity
also in three and four dimensions. Also, even in four dimensions, a Φn superpotential can
become relevant as a perturbation to certain fixed points [26], so with some modification
of our construction, the superpotential we find may eventually be important in analyzing
four dimensional CFT’s that arise from string theory.
The soliton analysis will give detailed information about the behavior for small membrane charge, which is the opposite limit from the AdS description discussed above that
governs the large charge behavior at least for the M -theory compactifications. For the
Type IIA and F -theory compactifications, the description of the large charge behavior
appears to be less simple.

3. Geometry of Domain Walls
As explained in section 2.6, our task now is to analyze the soliton structure for certain hypersurface singularities. In fact, we will consider the Ak singularities which were
introduced in section 2.2.
Instead of specializing to four-folds, it proves insightful to consider the more general
problem of identifying BPS states of wrapped n-branes in a Calabi-Yau n-fold near an
isolated singularity. To study the behavior near an Ak singularity, we consider a local
model for a Calabi-Yau n-fold given by
2
−Pm (z1 ) + z22 + ... + zn+1
=0

where Pm (z1 ) is a polynomial of degree m = k + 1 in z1 . When Pm has two equal roots,
we get a singular geometry. The most singular gemetry arises when Pm (z1 ) = z1m . For
a generic polynomial Pm (z1 ), the geometry is not singular and the compact homology of
this manifold has a basis made of m − 1 spheres of real dimension n intersecting each

other according to the Am−1 Dynkin diagram. For a particular choice of Pm , we explained
how to construct these spheres in section 2.2. The intersection form on the compact
26

homology is symmetric if n is even and antisymmetric if n is odd. We would like to
consider minimal wrapped n-branes, i.e. minimal supersymmetric cycles, in this geometry.
A supersymmetric cycle is a Lagrangian submanifold (that is, the Kähler form vanishes on
it). Moreover, on a minimal supersymmetric n-cycle the holomorphic n-form Ω of CalabiYau is real (with a suitably chosen overall phase) and gives the volume of the n-brane. For
a minimal supersymmetric cycle the quantity
Z
V =
|Ω|
C

which is the volume of cycle C, is minimized and is given by
Z
V =α
Ω
C

for some choice of phase α. Or stated equivalently, the condition is that
Z
Z
Ω .
|Ω| =
C

C

which is the condition for minimizing the volume of C among the Lagrangian submanifolds
in a given homology class.
The holomorphic n-form Ω, up to an overall complex scale factor, is given by
Ω=

idz1 ...dzn
dz1 ...dzn
=p
2
zn+1
z2 + ... + zn2 − Pm (z1 )

We would like to minimize the volume form given by |Ω|. To count the minimal supersym-

metric cycles, we follow the strategy in [27] and decompose the geometry to the “fiber and
the base” as follows. Suppose C is a supersymmetric minimal cycle. Consider the image

of C on z1 . This is a one-dimensional subspace, because for a fixed z1 , the manifold (being
P
defined by j>1 zj2 = Pm (z1 )) has for its only nontrivial cycle a sphere Sn−1
z1 . Note that
the radius of this sphere is |Pm (z1 )|1/2 , from which one can deduce by scaling that
Z

dz2 ∧ . . . ∧ dzn−1
= |Pm (z1 )|(n−2)/2
n−1
z
n
Sz

(3.1)

1

up to an irrelevant multiplicative constant. The inverse image of C over a point in the z1
plane must, if not empty, be a minimal cycle, and so must be n − 1-dimensional; hence

the image of C in the z1 plane must be one-dimensional. The minimization of |Ω| will be

done in two steps: We first consider Lagrangian submanifolds Cf (z1 ) for a fixed z1 which
27

minimize the

R

Cf (z1 )

|Ω| and next consider the minimization of the volume interval over an

interval I in z1 . In this way we get using (3.1)
Z

Cf (z1 )×I

|Ω| =

Z Z
I

Ω =

S n−1 (z1 )

Z

I

n−2

|Pm (z1 )| 2 dz1 .

(3.2)

We now minimize the volume of the supersymmetric n-cycle with respect to the choice of
the one-dimensional line segment I representing the image of the supersymmetric cycle on
the z1 plane. One can allow the line segment to end at some special points on z1 where
Pm (z1 ) = 0, and these are the only allowed boundaries. In fact, precisely if the line segment
terminates at zeroes of Pm , the D-brane worldvolume is closed and smooth. Indeed the
topology of the cycle is an Sn which can be viewed as an Sn−1 sphere fibered over the
interval, where at the boundaries of the interval the radius of Sn−1 vanishes. The expression
(3.2) is minimized if along the segment on z1 plane the condition |Pm (z)| = αPm (z) is
satisfied for some z-independent phase α. Let us define a function W with
n−2

dW = Pm 2 dz1

(3.3)

In terms of W , the condition for minimal volume is that the image of the curve in the W
plane be a straight line along the direction specified by α−1 . Moreover, the end-points of
the segment in the z1 plane correspond to critical points in W , i.e., dW = 0 (for n = 2 the
endpoints are defined by the condition that Pm (z1 ) = 0). These conditions are identical
[28] for finding solitons in an N = 2 Landau-Ginzburg theory in two dimension (or more
generally, BPS domain walls in theories with four supercharges in dimensions two, three,
or four) with superpotential given by W ! If n is even, (3.3) corresponds to a well defined
function of z1 . If n is odd, it gives rise to a well defined (meromorphic) one-form on a
hyperelliptic cover of the z1 plane, branched over the zeroes of Pm (z1 ).
Strictly speaking we have constructed the supersymmetric cycle by assuming that the
condition that the cycle Cf be Lagrangian is the same as being Lagrangian relative to the
Kähler form induced on the fiber. This is not necessarily true. For example if the Kähler
form has a piece of the form
k = ... + fi dz1 ∧ dzi∗ + ...
the condition of Lagrangian gets modified. In special cases, like when the polynomial Pm
has real coefficient one can use a Z2 antiholomorphic involution to argue that the cycles
28

we constructed are both Lagrangian and supersymmetric. In the more general case we
proceed as follows: Consider a generic
Pm (z1 ) =

Y
(z1 − ai )
i

Consider a one parameter family of Calabi-Yau metrics where
ai (t) = tai .
Note that the BPS states will be the same for all t, because the condition of the BPS
charges getting aligned does not change as we change t (the BPS charges only receive an
overall rescaling). However to construct the Kähler metric as a function of t we note that
it can be mapped to the previous metric by defining
ze1 = tz1

zei = tn/2 zi

f or i 6= 1

Thus we use the z variables but rescale the Kähler form accordingly. In this way as
t → ∞ the mixed terms in the Kähler form are dominated by the terms purely in the
fiber direction (for n > 2 which is the case of main interest). Therefore in this limit the

condition of Lagrangian submanifold in the fiber that we have used becomes accurate.
Let us consider some special cases. The cases for a K3 surface and for a Calabi-Yau
threefold have already been considered in [27] (see also [29,30]), and will be reviewed below.
Solitons for K3
In the case n = 2, the above geometry is the complex deformation of the Am−1
singularity. For any choice of the polynomial Pm (z1 ), we expect m(m − 1)/2 solitons (up

to the choice of orientation) to complete the adjoint representation of U (1)m−1 to the

SU (m) gauge multiplet. From (3.3), we see that in this case W = z1 . There are m roots
for Pm (z), and the solitons correspond to straight lines between the roots. Note that this
gives m(m − 1)/2 solitons up to the choice of the orientation, as was anticipated.
Solitons for CY3
For the case of Calabi-Yau threefolds, n = 3. In this case W is defined by
1

dW = Pm (z1 ) 2 dz1 .
29

Here dW can be viewed as a meromorphic one-form on a hyperelliptic Riemann surface
over z1 branched over the roots of Pm (z1 ). The geometry of these solitons for this class
of conformal theories would correspond to straight lines on the Jacobian of this surface
defined by the integrals dW and is presently under study [31].
Solitons for CY4
For the case of four-folds, which are of course our main focus in the present paper,
the definition of W in (3.3) shows that W is a polynomial of degree m + 1 in the z1 plane.
We have already shown that the conditions for finding the solitons in this geometry are
the same as those in an LG theory with the superpotential W . In this case, however, if
we use our four-fold in Type IIA superstring theory, the analogy becomes more precise:
compactification on the four-fold leads to a theory in two dimensions with N = 2, and it

is natural to identify the corresponding W with the superpotential of an N = 2 Landau-

Ginzburg theory. We will indeed argue that for a certain choice of the membrane charge,
the Type IIA on a deformed A1 singularity leads to an N = 2 theory with the same W
for its superpotential. For more general choices of the membrane charge, we find closely
related Kazama-Suzuki coset models at level 1.
Before we discuss these subtleties, note that even though we have m critical points, it
is no longer true in general that we have m(m − 1)/2 solitons. In general the pre-image of
a straight line connecting the images of critical points in the W plane will not connect the
critical points in the z1 space. In fact as we change the polynomial Pm (z1 ), it is known
that the number of BPS states jumps [24]. For some choices of Pm (z1 ) we do have exactly
the same number of solitons as in the K3 case. For example, it has been shown [28] that
for
Pm (z1 ) = z1m − µn
for any constant µ, there is one soliton for each pair of m critical points z1 = ωµ with
ω m = 1, though, unlike the K3 case the image in the z1 plane is not a straight line.
It would be interesting to compare the formula for W that we have deduced from
the soliton structure to the analysis of section 2.4. Although this is guaranteed to work,
because both capture the mass of the BPS soliton, we have not attempted to check this
correspondence explicitly.
30

4. Identifications With Kazama-Suzuki Models
Let us consider in more detail Type IIA strings propagating on a smooth hypersurface
X obtained by deforming the Am−1 singularity:
−Pm (z1 ) + z22 + z32 + z42 + z52 = 0.
As explained in section 2, in order to specify the problem fully, we must fix the value C∞
of the C-field at infinity and also the flux
Φ = N + 12 ξ 2 ,

(4.1)

where ξ = [G/2π] is the characteristic class of the C-field.
As we explained in section 2.2, ξ is restricted to a fixed coset in Γ∗ /Γ, where Γ and Γ∗
are the root and weight lattices of the Lie group SU (m). The coset in which ξ takes values
is determined by C∞ . For the theory to have a mass gap, as discussed in section 2.6, we
set Φ equal to the minimum value of 21 ξ 2 (for all ξ in the given coset), so that N = 0 for
all vacua.
This can be made very explicit in the case of the Am−1 singularity. C∞ takes values in
Γ∗ /Γ, which is isomorphic to the center of SU (m), or Zm . For k = 0, . . . , m−1, if C∞ = k,
then to minimize ξ 2 , ξ must be a weight of the k-fold antisymmetric tensor product of the
fundamental representation of SU (m). We denote that representation as Rk . The number
of choices of ξ is the dimension of Rk or m!/k!(m − k)!. This is the number of vacuum
states of the k th model, if Pm is such that the hypersurface X is smooth.

For k = 0, there is only one vacuum (ξ = 0), and the theory is trivial and massive.
Let us consider the next simplest case, where k = 1 and ξ is a weight of the fundamental
representation of SU (m). In this case, we have m vacua. To find the degeneracy of
the solitons between these vacua, we use the analysis of section 3. We found that the
solitons are exactly the same as those for an N = 2 LG theory with a chiral field Φ and

a superpotential W obeying dW/dΦ = Pm (Φ). In fact we can identify the m vacua with
the m critical points of Pm , and as we found in section 3, the condition for the existence
of a soliton in the LG theory is exactly the same as the condition for a BPS wrapped fourbrane in Type IIA near the Am−1 singularity. In this case the soliton data are enough to
determine the theory [23] as discussed at the end of section 2; the two-dimensional theory
with superpotential W is the Am minimal model [3,4]. So the Type IIA theory near an
31

Am−1 four-fold singularity is governed by the Am N = 2 minimal model. This model can
also be viewed as an N = 2 Kazama-Suzuki coset model at level one, of the form
SU (m)
SU (m − 1) × U (1)
For the M -theory or F -theory near an Am−1 four-fold singularity, we still get a description in terms of a chiral field with the same superpotential, but in most instances (the
exception being Φ3 in three dimensions), a theory in three or four dimensions with a Φm+1
superpotential is believed to flow to a free theory in the infrared.
We now consider the other choices of C∞ , so that ξ is a weight of the k-fold antisymmetric product of the fundamental representation of SU (m) with some k > 1. We
argue that it has exactly the same solitonic spectrum as a deformation of the following LG
theory, which we will call the k-fold symmetric combination of the k = 1 model. Consider
the function of k variables
W (z1 , . . . , zk ) = z1m+1 + z2m+1 + ... + zkm+1 .
It is invariant under permutations of the zi , and so can be expressed as a polynomial in
the elementary symmetric functions
xl =

X

zi1 ...zil .

i1 <...<il

The superpotential we consider is thus
W (x1 , . . . , xk ) = W (z1 ) + . . . + W (zk ).

(4.2)

The LG model with superpotential (4.2) has been conjectured in [32] to be equivalent to
the following Kazama-Suzuki coset model at level 1:
SU (m)
SU (m − k) × SU (k) × U (1)
For the deformed singularity, with ∂W = Pm , we claim that the deformed LG superpotential is given by
W (x1 , ..., xk ) = W (z1 ) + ... + W (zk )
where again what we mean by this expression is that the superpotential is W (z1 ) + . . . +
W (zk ) regarded as a polynomial in the elementary symmetric functions x1 , . . . , xk . Let us
32

see why this LG superpotential has exactly the same solitonic spectrum that we get for
Type IIA at an Am−1 four-fold singularity with C∞ = k mod m. It is not too difficult to
show [23,33] that the set of vacua of a LG theory made of a k-fold symmetric combination
of a given LG theory (in the sense introduced above) can be identified with the k-fold
antisymmetric tensor product of the space of vacua of the original LG theory.14 As we
already discussed, the k = 1 model has a one-variable superpotential W (z), and its vacua
correspond to the fundamental weights of the SU (m) lattice. Thus we can identify the
vacua of the k-fold symmetric combination of the k = 1 model with the weights of the
k-fold anti-symmetric tensor representation Rk . As far as the allowed solitons, on the LG
side, they can be constructed in the decoupled theory with superpotential W (z1 , . . . , zk ) =
W (z1 ) + . . . + W (zk ) before re-expressing this in terms of the symmetric functions xi . In
this description, it is clear that soliton states are just the products of soliton states in the
individual one-variable theories, and that irreducible solitons (which cannot break up into
several widely separated mutually BPS solitons) are solitons in just one of the variables zi .
So if we label the vacua by |i1 , ..., ik i, with is denoting a vacuum in the sth one-particle

theory, then the allowed solitons only change one vacuum index at a time. So the solitons
of a LG theory that is constructed as a k-fold symmetric combination of a one-variable
theory are in natural correspondence with the solitons of the one-variable theory. This is
the same result that we get from Type IIA near the Am−1 singularity with C∞ = k mod m.

Indeed, for this model, the solitons are constructed by finding supersymmetric four-cycles.
The analysis of those cycles in section 3 depends only on the geometry of the hypersurface
and makes no reference to C∞ . Hence the solitons for any k are in a natural sense the
same as the solitons of the k = 1 model.
In other words the solitons are in 1-1 correspondence with those roots of SU (m)
that appear as solitons for the one-variable LG superpotential given by W . Whichever
roots appear act in the natural way on the weights of the representation Rk . In the
case W = z m+1 − az, all the roots appear with multiplicity 1. This structure for the

solitons of the deformed Kazama-Suzuki model was suggested in [34] where it was argued
to correspond (with a specific choice of Kähler potential) to an integrable model.
14

The main point that must be shown is that the vacua in the different factors must be distinct.

To illustrate why, it suffices to consider the case that k = 2 and that each individual model has
only one vacuum. So we start with m = 2: W (z) = z 2 . Then we write W (z1 , z2 ) = z12 + z22 in
terms of the symmetric functions x1 = z1 + z2 , x2 = z1 z2 , getting W (x1 , x2 ) = x21 − 2x2 . This
function has no critical points, so the combined model has no supersymmetric vacua, as expected.

33

4.1. Other A-D-E Singularities
So far we have mainly considered the local singularity to be
H(z1 , z2 , z3 ) + z42 + z52 = 0
with H being an Am−1 singularity. Here we would like to generalize this to the case where
H determines a D or E type singularity.
The general structure is quite like what we have seen for Am−1 . C∞ takes values in
Γ∗ /Γ, where Γ is the root lattice of the appropriate simply-connected A-D-E group G, and
Γ∗ is the weight lattice of G. The quotient Γ∗ /Γ is isomorphic to the center of G.
Just as in the SU (m) case, to make possible a deformation to a massive theory, we
need to pick Φ so that ξ ranges over the weights of the smallest representation with a given
non-trivial action of the center of G. (If we pick the trivial action of the center, we will
get the trivial representation and a massive free theory.) The appropriate representations
are the representations with Dynkin label 1. In the Dn case, the relevant choices are the
vector and spinor representations. For D2n , there are two different spinor representations,
but they differ by an outer automorphism of D2n and give equivalent theories. So there are
essentially two choices of C∞ leading to massive theories based on the Dn singularity. For
the E6 theory, there is only the fundamental 27 dimensional representation (and its conjugate, which gives an equivalent theory); for E7 there is the fundamental 56 dimensional
representation. So E6 and E7 lead to one massive theory each. E8 is simply-connected with
trivial center, so we cannot use it to get a conformal theory with a massive deformation.
The distinguished representations that we have described are in one-to-one correspondence with nodes of index 1 on the A-D-E Dynkin diagram and thence with Hermitian
symmetric spaces G/H (where H is obtained by omitting the given node from the Dynkin
diagram). Apart from the Grassmannians SU (m)/SU (k) × SU (m − k) × U (1) that we

have already encountered, these Hermitian symmetric spaces are as follows. For the Dn
case, there are two inequivalent choices, given by
SO(2n)
SO(2n − 2) × SO(2)

for fundamental rep.

SO(2n)
U (n)

for spinor rep.,
34

and for the E6 and E7 cases one has
E6
SO(10) × U (1)

for fundamental rep.

E7
E6 × U (1)

for fundamental rep.

Such a Hermitian symmetric space determines a series of N = 2 Kazama-Suzuki models

(at level 1, 2, 3 . . .). It is natural to conjecture that, as we have found for Am−1 , the massive

models obtained from Type IIA at an A-D-E singularity are the massive deformations of
the corresponding level 1 Kazama-Suzuki (or KS) models. As a first check, it is known that
for a level one G/H KS model, the dimension of the chiral ring is equal to the dimension
of the corresponding representation of G. This in turn is equal to the dimension of the
cohomology of G/H and it was conjectured in [32] that the chiral ring is isomorphic to
the cohomology ring, which in turn was shown to arise from the ring of an LG theory.
Thus the G/H theories at level 1 were identified with specific LG models.15 Moreover, the
structure of the solitons for a special (integrable) deformation of the KS model at level 1
was studied in [34] and it was conjectured that the solitons exist precisely for each allowed
single root acting on the corresponding weight diagram. Though we have not analyzed the
BPS spectrum of the D4-branes in this case to find the multiplicity of the solitons for each
root, it is natural to expect that at least for specific deformations, just as in the Am−1
case, the solitons are given by the root lattice of the corresponding group with multiplicity
1. In this case we would reproduce the solitonic structure anticipated in [34]. It is quite
satisfying that we apparently get all the Hermitian symmetric space KS models at level 1
in such a uniform way from considering singularities of CY four-folds.

5. Other Types Of Singularity
The only four-fold singularities that we have so far considered in any detail are hypersurface singularities. A Calabi-Yau four-fold can, however, develop singularities of many
different types. We cannot offer any sort of overview of the possibilities, but will briefly
analyze two cases in the present section.
15

The higher level KS models do not generally admit an LG description.

35

5.1. Hyper-Kähler Singularities
First we will consider what one might call hyper-Kähler singularities – singularities
near which Y admits a hyper-Kähler structure, though Y may not be globally a hyperKähler manifold. An important fact here is that M -theory compactification on R3 × Y

with Y hyper-Kähler has N = 3 supersymmetry in three dimensions, because the space of
covariantly constant spinors on a hyper-Kähler eight-manifold is three-dimensional.

To isolate the behavior near the singularity, we replace Y by an asymptotically conical
hyper-Kähler manifold X that is developing a singularity. We will focus on a very concrete
example, with X = T ∗ CP2 , the cotangent bundle of complex projective two-space. This
hyper-Kähler manifold is conveniently obtained by considering a U (1) gauge theory with
eight supercharges, and three hypermultiplets Ai , i = 1, 2, 3, of charge 1. 16 There is an

SU (3) global symmetry group, with the Ai transforming as the 3. There is also an SU (2)
R-symmetry group, and it is possible to add an SU (2) triplet of Fayet-Iliopoulos terms d~
to the D-flatness equations. A manifestly SU (2)-invariant way to exhibit the D-flatness
equations is as follows. The bosonic parts of the Ai can be regarded as a complex field

Aiα , α = 1, 2, transforming as (3, 2) under SU (3) × SU (2)R . The D-flatness condition is
X
i

β
Aiα Ai = d~ · ~σαβ ,

(5.1)

with ~σ the traceless 2 × 2 Pauli matrices. The moduli space X of zero energy states of the

classical gauge theory is the space of solutions of (5.1) divided by the action of the gauge
theory. In this description, it is manifest that if d~ = 0, then X has an SU (3) × SU (2)R

symmetry, broken if d~ 6= 0 to SU (3) × U (1)R . The SU (3) preserves the hyper-Kähler
structure, and SU (2)R rotates the three complex structures on X. If d~ = 0, X is a cone
over a seven-manifold Q described by
X

β

Aiα Ai = δαβ .

(5.2)

i

It is fairly easy to see that this manifold is a copy of SU (3)/U (1), where the U (1) acts by
right multiplication by
diag(eiθ , eiθ , e−2iθ ).
16

(5.3)

We will present this gauge theory as a formal device, but it may have a physical interpretation

in terms of a membrane probe of the singularity.

36

SU (3) acts on SU (3)/U (1) by left multiplication, and SU (2)R acts by right multiplication
by SU (3) elements that commute with (5.3). Even if d~ 6= 0, X is asymptotic to a cone
over Q at big distances. The R-symmetry group that acts faithfully on X is actually

SO(3)R = SU (2)R /Z2 . That is because the center of SU (2)R is equivalent to a U (1)
gauge transformation. In M -theory on R3 × X, the three spacetime supersymmetries

transform as a vector of SO(3)R .
Now let us explain why for d~ 6= 0, X is equivalent to T ∗ CP2 . In terms of a description

that makes manifest only half the supersymmetry of the gauge theory, one can break
up the bosonic part of the Ai into pairs of complex fields B i , Ci , transforming as 3

and 3 of an SU (3) symmetry group, and with charges 1 and −1 under the U (1) gauge
group. (Compared to the previous description, B i = Ai1 and Ci = Ai 2 .) This description
breaks SO(3)R to SO(2)R = U (1)R , with d~ splitting as a real component dR and complex
component dC . The D-flatness equations of the U (1) gauge theory are in this description
X
i

|B i |2 −

X
j

X

|Cj |2 = dR
(5.4)

B i Ci = dC .

i

One must also divide by the action of U (1). By an SO(3)R rotation, one can set dC = 0
q
P
P ei 2
i
i
e
|Cj |2 obey
|B | = 1 and, after
and dR > 0. The quantities B = B / dR +
j

i

dividing by the gauge group, define a point in CP2 . With dC = 0, the second equation
in (5.4) can be interpreted to mean that Ci lies in the cotangent space to CP2 , at the
e i . Thus X is isomorphic to T ∗ CP2 . For any manifold W ,
point determined by the B

regarded as the zero section of T ∗ W , the self-intersection number W · W is equal to the
Euler characteristic of W . The Euler characteristic of CP2 is 3, so in our example
W ·W =3

(5.5)

with W = [CP2 ].
Though turning on d~ breaks the SO(3)R symmetry of X to SO(2), it preserves the
hyper-Kähler structure and all of the supersymmetry of M -theory on R3 × X.
The appearance of an SO(3)R symmetry at d~ = 0 is a hint that M -theory on R3 × X

flows to a superconformal field theory in the infrared as d~ → 0. Indeed, in three spacetime

dimensions with N supercharges, the superconformal algebra contains an SO(N )R R-

symmetry group.

37

To get more insight, let us now analyze the possible G-fields on the smooth manifold
X with d~ 6= 0. Since X is contractible to CP2 , one has H 4 (X; R) = H 4 (CP2 ; R). The

non-zero Betti numbers are h0 = h2 = h4 = 1. The cohomology with compact support

is, by Poincaré duality, the dual of this, so the non-zero Betti numbers with compact
support are h4cpct = h6cpct = h8cpct . Hence, just on dimensional grounds, the natural map
k
4
i : Hcpct
(X; R) → H k (X; R) is zero except for k = 4. For k = 4, Hcpct
(X; R) is generated

by the class [W ] = [CP2 ], and the nonzero intersection number (5.5) implies that i 6= 0.
For an asymptotically conical manifold, one expects the space of L2 harmonic forms to

coincide with the image of i, so in the present example we expect precisely one L2 harmonic
form α, in dimension four. α is necessarily primitive with respect to all of the complex
structures, since if K is any of the Kähler forms, then α ∧ K, if not zero, would be an L2
harmonic six-form.

Hence, turning on a nonzero G-field, proportional to α, preserves all of the supersymmetries. In fact, we must turn on such a G-field, for the following reason. According
to [5], on a spacetime X, the general flux quantization law for G is not that G/2π has
integral periods but that the periods of G/2π coincide with the periods of c2 (X)/2 mod
integers. (There is a slightly more general formulation if X is not a complex manifold.) In
our situation, the integral of c2 (X)/2 over CP2 is a half-integer,17 so we need
Z

G
1
∈Z+ ,
2
CP2 2π

(5.6)

and in particular G cannot be zero.
If we normalize the four-form α to represent the class [CP2 ], then α generates
4
Hcpct
(X; Z) (or rather its image in real cohomology). Also, α · α = 3, so the dual lat-

tice H 4 (X; Z) is generated by α/3. Hence, we require




G
α
=
k + 12
2π
3

with k ∈ Z.

(5.7)

4
One also has H 4 (Q; Z) = H 4 (X; Z)/Hcpct
(X; Z) = Z3 . The different possibilities for the

restriction of the C-field to ∂X = Q are determined by the value of k modulo three.
17

Let the total Chern class of the tangent bundle of CP2 be 1 + c1 + c2 . The total Chern class

of the cotangent bundle of CP2 is then 1 − c1 + c2 . The total Chern class of T ∗ CP2 , restricted
to CP2 ⊂ T ∗ CP2 , is hence (1 − c1 + c2 )(1 + c1 + c2 ) = 1 − c21 + 2c2 , so c2 (T ∗ CP2 ) = −c21 + 2c2 .
Since

R

2

c = 9, which is odd, the claim follows.
CP2 1

38

In the presence of N membranes and a G-field, the membrane flux at infinity is
Z
(k + 21 )2
G∧G
1
=
N
+
.
(5.8)
Φ=N+
2 X (2π)2
6
In evaluating the integral, we used (5.7) and the fact that α · α = 3. A check on (5.8)

is that if k is shifted by an integer multiple of 3 (the 3 is needed so as to leave fixed the

restriction of G to Q), Φ changes by an integer. According to the discussion in section 2,
a model is specified by fixing the value of Φ and also by fixing the value of k modulo 3. A
supersymmetric vacuum is then found by finding a nonnegative N and an integer k in the
given mod 3 coset such that (5.8) is obeyed. There is precisely one case of a model having
more than one vacuum, with all vacua having N = 0. This arises for Φ = 3/8, with k = 1
and k = −2. We do not know a Landau-Ginzburg or other semiclassical description for

this N = 3 model with two vacua (but see below).
For sufficiently large Φ, this model (at d~ = 0) is expected to flow to a nontrivial
superconformal field theory in the infrared. Indeed, the standard conjectures would suggest
that the SCFT in question is dual to M -theory on AdS3 × Q, with the C-field on Q being

determined by the value of k modulo three. We have no good way at present to determine
if the model flows to a nontrivial SCFT also for small Φ.
We expect that instead of T ∗ CP2 , one could in a similar way analyze T ∗ F , where F

is a two-dimensional Fano surface. One can also consider a collection of intersecting CP2 ’s
(with a suitable normal bundle over it) and carry out a similar analysis.
Physical Interpretation Of Gauge Theory?
So far the U (1) gauge theory with three charged hypermultiplets has been considered
just as a mathematical device. It is natural to wonder whether, in fact, this gauge theory
can be interpreted physically as the long wavelength theory of a membrane probe of the
R3 × T ∗ CP2 solution of M -theory. More generally, we would like to find an effective
action for N membranes probing the R3 × T ∗ CP2 singularity (in the limit that CP2 is

“blown down”) that will give a gauge theory dual of M -theory on AdS4 ×Q. In the spirit of

[17,18], such a description might be roughly as follows. Consider an N = 4 supersymmetric

gauge theory in three dimensions with gauge group S(U (N ) × U (N )) and hypermultiplets
consisting of three copies of (N, N). Break N = 4 to N = 3 with some Chern-Simons

interaction, determined by the C-field. (Gauge theories with Chern-Simons interactions
are essentially the only known classical field theories in three spacetime dimensions without
gravity with N = 3 supersymmetry. For a study of their dynamics in the abelian case, see

[35].) Such a model might have roughly the right properties.
39

5.2. Blowup Of Orbifold Singularity
The other kind of singularity that we will briefly examine is a simple orbifold singularity. We begin with C4 , with complex coordinates z1 , . . . , z4 , and consider the Z4 symmetry
za → iza . The quotient C4 /Z4 is a Calabi-Yau orbifold.

If one analyzes this type of orbifold in Type IIA string theory, one finds that there

is one blow-up mode and no complex structure deformation. The blow-up corresponds to
a very simple resolution of the singularity, in which it is replaced by the total space W
of a line bundle L = O(−4) over CP3 . Thus, CP3 is embedded in W as an exceptional

divisor, the “zero section” of L. W admits a Calabi-Yau metric, asymptotic in closed form

to the flat metric on C4 /Z4 ; because of the SU (4) symmetry of W , it is actually possible
to describe this metric by quadrature, though we will not do so here.

One might at first think that one could approach the C4 /Z4 orbifold singularity in
M -theory by a motion in Kähler moduli space, leading to a blow-down of the exceptional
divisor CP3 ⊂ W . However, since the Hodge numbers hi,0 (CP3 ) are zero for i > 0,
fivebrane wrapping on CP3 will produce a superpotential [12], proportional roughly to

e−V with V the volume of CP3 . Moreover, though the multiple cover formula for multiple
fivebrane wrapping in M -theory is not known, analogy with other multiple cover formulas
(such as the formula for multiple covers by fundamental strings [36,37]) suggests that the
sum over multiple covers of CP3 will produce a pole at V = 0. If this is so, there will
not be interesting long distance physics associated with the behavior of M -theory near a
C4 /Z4 singularity. At any rate, one certainly cannot expect to study M -theory on C4 /Z4
while ignoring the superpotential.
Is it possible to include a G-field on W while preserving supersymmetry? If so, then
since the G-field must vanish in cohomology on a fivebrane worldvolume (because of the
existence of a field T on the fivebrane with dT = G), in the presence of the G-field
the superpotential would be absent, and the question of the behavior near the C4 /Z4
singularity would be restored.
The answer to the question of whether a supersymmetric G-field is possible turns out,
however, to be “no,” in the following interesting way. First of all, W is contractible to
CP3 , so its nonzero Betti numbers are h0 = h2 = h4 = h6 = 1. For cohomology with
compact support, one has the dual Betti numbers h2cpct = h4cpct = h6cpct = h8cpct = 1.
k
This suggests that the map i : Hcpct
(W ; R) → H k (W ; R) may be nonzero for k = 2, 4,

and 6. A topological analysis, using the fact that c1 (L)3 |W 6= 0, shows that this is so.
40

Consequently, given the asymptotically conical nature of the Calabi-Yau metric on W , we
expect the space of L2 harmonic forms on W to be three-dimensional, with one class each
in dimension 2, 4, and 6. Given this, there is only one option for how the SU (2) group
R that acts on the cohomology of a Kähler manifold (see Appendix I) can act on the L2
harmonic forms on W : they transform with spin 1. Hence, though there is an L2 harmonic
four-form on W , it is not primitive, and one cannot turn on a G-field without breaking
supersymmetry.
6. Brane Perspective
We will conclude this paper by pointing out a reinterpretation of the problem in terms
of singularities of branes. We already explained in section 2.6 that F -theory on a fourfold singularity can be reinterpreted as Type IIB with a D7-brane that has a world-volume
R4 ×L, where L ⊂ C3 is a singular complex surface. By successive circle compactifications,

it follows that M -theory or Type IIA at a four-fold singularity can be described by Type
IIA with a singular sixbrane R3 × L, or Type IIB with a singular fivebrane R2 × L.

Analogous phenomena have been noted in the past in the context of N = 2 conformal

theories with NS or M5-branes worldvolumes with singular geometry R4 × Σ where Σ

is a Riemann surface which develops a singularity, say of the form y 2 = xn locally (for

n > 2). These give models for studying Type II strings at a Calabi-Yau threefold singularity
capturing Argyres-Douglas points of N = 2 conformal theories [38] and are presently under
study [31].

As we discussed in section 2.6, it is important that in the cases that we have looked
at, there are no corrections to the classical Rn × L geometry. Let us raise the general

question of this sort. Suppose we have a p-brane of some kind, with worldvolume
Rn × X p+1−n

embedded in R10 or R11 depending on whether we are dealing with string theory or M theory. We assume that this geometry preserves some number of supersymmetries in Rn .
Let us assume X develops a singularity. Is this singular geometry smoothed out in the
quantum theory? A necessary condition for that is the existence of instantons which end
on X. So if q-branes can end on this particular p-brane, the condition is the absence of
compact q-cycles in X. So for Dp-branes in Type IIA or IIB string theory, since D(p − 2)-

branes and fundamental one-branes can end on them, the condition is the absence of
topologically non-trivial compact one-cycles and p − 2-cycles in the geometry of X. For
M 5-branes, the condition is the absence of compact two-cycles in X.
41

Appendix I. Primitive Forms
The de Rham cohomology of a compact Kähler manifold X, or the space of L2 harmonic forms on any Kähler manifold, admits an SU (2) action which is as follows. (See [39],
pp. 122-6, for a mathematical introduction.) A diagonal generator J3 of SU (2) multiplies
a p-form by (n − p)/2, where n is the complex dimension of X. The lowering operator J−
acts by wedge product with the Kähler form K:

G → K ∧ G.

(I.1)

And the raising operator J+ is the adjoint operation of contraction with K:
Gi1 i2 ...in → K i1 i2 Gi1 i2 ...in .

(I.2)

Conceptually, this SU (2) action arises as follows. Begin with the supersymmetric
nonlinear sigma model in four dimensions with target space X, and dimensionally reduce
it to 0 + 1 dimensions. This gives a supersymmetric system in which the Hilbert space is
the space of differential forms on X, the four supercharges are are the ∂ and ∂ operators
and their adjoints, and there is an SU (2) symmetry that comes from rotations of the three
extra dimensions. From this point of view, the SU (2) arises as an R-symmetry group, so
we denote it as R.
Since an (n − p)-form has J3 eigenvalue (n − p)/2, it clearly transforms under R with

spin at least |n − p|/2. For n − p ≥ 0, we declare the primitive part of H n−p (X; R) to
consist of the harmonic forms that transform with spin precisely (n − p)/2. For a middle-

dimensional form, with p = n, this definition means that the primitive part of H n (X; R)
consists precisely of the R-invariants.
For a noncompact Kähler manifold X, if all of the L2 harmonic forms are in the
middle dimension, then they are all automatically primitive. For a middle-dimensional L2
harmonic form that is not R-invariant can be raised and lowered to make L2 harmonic

forms of other dimensions.
For a middle-dimensional L2 harmonic form G, such as the G-field on a Calabi-Yau
four-fold, primitiveness is equivalent to either 0 = J− G, which is the condition on G given
in [8], or 0 = J+ G = K ∧ G.

An important illustrative case is that of a complex surface W . The middle-dimensional

cohomology of W is two-dimensional and can be decomposed as follows. The space of selfdual forms at a given point is three-dimensional; the self-dual forms are the (2, 0) and
42

(0, 2) forms and the multiples of the Kähler class K. The (2, 0) and (0, 2) forms are clearly
primitive (the lowering operator would map them to (3, 1) and (1, 3)-forms) but the Kähler
class K is not (as K ∧K 6= 0). The anti-self dual two-forms are of type (1, 1) and are of the

form α = aij dz i ∧ dz j where aij is traceless. Tracelessness of a means that α is annihilated

by the raising and lowering operators and so is primitive. So for a complex surface, the

middle-dimensional primitive cohomology is of type (2, 0) or (0, 2) and self-dual, or of type
(1, 1) and anti-self-dual.
Closer to our needs in this paper is the case of a complex four-fold X. At any point
P ∈ X, the holonomy group U (4) acts on the differential forms at P . Since the generator

of the center of U (4) simply multiplies a (p, q) form by p − q, we focus on the SU (4) action.

We look first at the (p, p) forms for p = 0, 1, 2, . . ., since they are closed under the action

of R. The (0, 0) forms transform in the trivial representation 1 of SU (4). The (1, 1)-forms
aij dz i ∧ dz j transform as 4 ⊗ 4 = 1 ⊕ 15, with 15 the adjoint representation. Since a (2, 0)
or (0, 2)-form hij dz i ∧ dz j or e
h dz i ∧ dz j transforms as the 6, the (2, 2)-forms transform
ij

as 6 ⊗ 6 = 1 ⊕ 15 ⊕ 20. From this, it follows that (2, 2)-forms that transform as 20 of
SU (4) have R = 0, those that transform as 15 have R = 1, and those that transform as 1
have R = 2.

In particular, the primitive (2, 2)-forms transform in an irreducible representation of
SU (4). From this, it follows that they all transform with the same eigenvalue under the
Hodge ∗ operator. To determine the sign, it suffices to consider the case that X = W1 ×W2 ,

with the Wi complex surfaces, and to consider on X the primitive (2, 2)-form G = α1 ∧ α2 ,

where for i = 1, 2, αi is a primitive (1, 1)-form on Wi . Since the αi are anti-self-dual, G is
self-dual.
We can similarly analyze the primitive (3, 1) cohomology. The (2, 0)-forms transform
as 6 under SU (4), while the (3, 1)-forms transform as 6 ⊕ 10. (3, 1)-forms that transform

as 10 of SU (4) have R = 0 and so are primitive, while those that transform as 6 have
R = 1. Since the primitive (3, 1)-forms transform irreducibly under SU (4), they again
all have the same eigenvalue of ∗. Indeed, by considering the case G = α ∧ β, with α a
primitive (1, 1)-form on a surface W1 and β a primitive (2, 0)-form on another surface W2 ,

we learn that the primitive (3, 1) cohomology of a four-fold is anti-self-dual.
Finally, the (4, 0) cohomology of a four-fold transforms trivially under SU (4) and is
primitive. By setting G = β1 ∧ β2 with βi a (2, 0) form on Wi for i = 1, 2, we learn that

the (4, 0) cohomology on a four-fold is self-dual.

In sum, the Hodge ∗ operator acts on the primitive (p, 4 −p) cohomology of a four-fold

as (−1)p . This type of argument can clearly be generalized to other dimensions.
43

Appendix II. Supersymmetry Conditions in Eleven Dimensions
In this appendix we extend the analysis of [8] to compactifications of M-theory on
Calabi-Yau four-folds with general G-flux, allowing for the possibility that the threedimensional cosmological constant is non-zero. In the original version of this paper we
showed that turning on holomorphic G-flux of type (4, 0) induces a mass for the gravitino
R
fields, mψ ∼ G ∧ Ω. In a supersymmetric situation masses of the bosonic modes of the

supergravity multiplet should be related to mψ in a supersymmetric fashion. In particular,
one should expect a non-zero cosmological constant Λ = −|mψ |2 . However, it turns out

that compactification with a G4,0 flux leads to a solution with zero cosmological constant
and, therefore, implies broken supersymmetry, see below and [40].

We follow the notations of [8] where capital letters M , N , . . . run from 0 to 10 and
denote eleven-dimensional indices; m, n, . . . are real indices tangent to Y ; and Greek letters
µ, ν, . . . stand for the three-dimensional Lorentzian indices 0,1,2. Finally, lower case letters
a, b, . . . from the beginning of the alphabet denote holomorphic indices tangent to Y .
The bosonic part of the eleven-dimensional effective action, corrected by the σ-model
anomaly on the five-brane world-volume, has the following form:
Z
Z
i
1
1 h1
1
11 √
d x −gR −
G ∧ ∗G + C ∧ G ∧ G − (2π)4 C ∧ I8
S11 =
2
2
2
6

(II.1)

The eight-form anomaly polynomial can be expressed in terms of the Riemann tensor [41]:

1 
1
1
2 2
4
I8 =
−
(trR ) +
trR
(2π)4
768
192

(II.2)

1
In these units the five-brane tension T6 = (2π)
3 . The field equation for G that follows from

the action (II.1) looks like:
N
X
1
4
δ 8 (xm − Pi )
d ∗ G = − G ∧ G + (2π) I8 −
2
i=1

(II.3)

This equation is a macroscopic analog of the anomaly equation (2.1). In fact, the right-hand
side of (II.3) represents a local source for the field Gµνρm . For a compact Calabi-Yau space
Y , the G-flux has nowhere to go. Hence, the integral of the right-hand side of (II.3) has to
vanish, leading to the anomaly cancellation condition (2.1). In order to satisfy the equation
of motion (II.3) we take the following ansatz for the three-dimensional components of G:
Gµνρm = ǫµνρ ∂m f (xm )
44

(II.4)

We also allow for arbitrary internal components Gmnpq , the form of which will be
fixed by the field equation and supersymmetry conditions. As we will see in a moment,
a maximally symmetric compactification on Y with nontrivial G-flux typically leads to
warped metric:



ds211 = ∆−1 ds23 (xµ ) + ds28 (xm )

(II.5)

where we introduced the warp factor ∆(xm ). For now, both ∆(xm ) and f (xm ) are scalar
functions of the coordinates on Y . Below we show that these two functions are related by
the supersymmetry conditions which we are going to analyze now.
Assuming that the gravitino, ψM , vanishes in the background, supersymmetry variations of the bosonic fields are all identically zero. So, we only have to check that the
variations of the gravitino also vanish for some Majorana spinor η:
1
δψM ≡ ∇M η − ΓM N ∂N (log ∆)η−
4
−

(II.6)

1 3/2
P QRS
∆ (ΓM P QRS − 8δM
Γ
)GP QRS η = 0
288

The first two terms in this expression come from the covariant derivative in the elevendimensional metric (II.5).
Following [8], we make the 11=3+8 split:
Γµ = γµ ⊗ γ9 ,

Γm = 1 ⊗ γm

where the eleven-dimensional gamma-matrices ΓM are hermitian for M = 1, . . . , 10 and
anti-hermitian for M = 0. They satisfy:
{ΓM , ΓN } = 2gM N

(II.7)

ΓM1 ...Mn = Γ[M1 . . . ΓMn ]

(II.8)

We use the standard notation

for the antisymmetrized product of gamma-matrices. We decompose the supersymmetry
parameter as:
η = ǫ ⊗ ξ + ǫ∗ ⊗ ξ ∗

(II.9)

where ǫ is an anti-commuting Killing spinor in three dimensions:
∇µ ǫ = mψ γµ ǫ∗
45

(II.10)

and ξ is a commuting eight-dimensional complex spinor of definite chirality. From the
commutation relation of ∇µ in anti-de Sitter space we find the usual relation between the

complex gravitino mass mψ and the value of the three-dimensional cosmological constant:
Λ = −|mψ |2

(II.11)

Without loss of generality we can take:
γ9 ξ = ξ

(II.12)

Here γ9 is the eight-dimensional chirality operator that anti-commutes with all the γm ’s
and satisfies γ92 = 1. The sign in (II.12) determines whether it is space-filling membranes
or space-filling antimembranes that can be included without breaking supersymmetry. If
the sign is changed, the corresponding supersymmetric vacuum can be obtained from that
with γ9 ξ = +ξ by changing the sign of the function f and the chirality of ǫ.
The µ-component of the supersymmetry condition (II.6) takes the form:
1
δψµ ≡ ∇µ η − ∂n (log ∆)(γµ ⊗ γ9 γ n )η−
4
1
1 3/2
∆ (γµ ⊗ γ9 γ mnpq )Gmnpq η + ∆3/2 (∂m f )(γµ ⊗ γ m )η = 0
−
288
6

(II.13)

Substituting the decomposition (II.9) for η and using equations (II.10) and (II.12) we
obtain our first supersymmetry condition. Projecting the result onto subspaces of positive
and negative chirality, we actually get two conditions: one comes from the first and the
third term in (II.13); and the other one comes from the second and the fourth term.
Moreover, in a vacuum with N = 2 supersymmetry variations proportional to ǫ and ǫ∗
must vanish separately. Therefore, we find:
f = ∆−3/2 ,

288mψ ∆−3/2 ξ = Gξ
/ ∗.

(II.14)

Here we have written G
/ for the total contraction Gmnpq γ mnpq . According to our ansatz
(II.4), the three-dimensional components of the four-form field strength:
Gµνρm = ǫµνρ ∂m ∆−3/2

(II.15)

have the form similar to the membrane solution with local “effective” membrane charge
density, as follows from the field equation (II.3) for the internal components. Note, that for
46

a compact Y there is no global membrane charge. Substituting (II.15) into (II.3), we obtain
two additional equations. One equation uniquely determines G given its cohomology class:
∂m (∆−3/2 Gmnpq ) =

1
(∂m ∆−3/2 )ǫmnpqrstu Grstu
4!

(II.16)

It is identically obeyed if G is self-dual (as we will find) and closed. The second equation
which follows from (II.3) determines the warp factor:
3/2

d ∗ d log ∆

N
X
1
4
δ 8 (xm − Pi )
= G ∧ G − (2π) I8 +
2
i=1

(II.17)

Now we return to the original supersymmetry condition (II.6) and consider its mcomponent:
δψm ≡ ǫ ⊗ ∇m ξ − mψ ǫ ⊗ γm ξ ∗ +

1 3/2
∆ Gmnpq ǫ ⊗ γ npq ξ+
24

(II.18)

3
1
+ ∂m (log ∆)ǫ ⊗ ξ − ∂n (log ∆)ǫ ⊗ γm n ξ + c.c. = 0
4
8
where we used the explicit form of the solution (II.14) and standard properties of gammamatrices. Once again ǫ and ǫ∗ components of this equation must vanish separately. By
means of the rescaling transformations:
gmn
ξ

→ ∆3/2 gmn
→ ∆−1/4 ξ

the ǫ-component of (II.18) can be written in the following compact form:
1 −3/4
∆
Gmnpq γ npq ξ = 0
24

∇m ξ − mψ ∆3/4 γm ξ ∗ +

(II.19)

Then, following [8], we choose ξ to be a covariantly constant spinor of unit norm, and
use it to define the complex structure Jm n = iξ † γm n ξ and the Kähler form Jab = igab .
Since the metric on Y is of type (1,1), it is convenient to think of ‘holomorphic’ gammamatrices γ a and γa as creation and annihilation operators that satisfy the algebra:
{γ a , γ b } = {γ a , γ b } = 0,

{γ a , γ b } = 2g ab

Namely, γ a and γa act on the Fock “vacuum” ξ as annihilation operators:
γ a ξ = 0,

γa ξ ∗ = 0,
47

γ a ξ ∗ = 0,

γa ξ = 0

(II.20)

To obtain the algebraic constraints on the field G, we multiply the differential equation
(II.19) by γ a which kills the first term in that equation:
24mψ ∆3/2 γ a γm ξ ∗ − Gmnpq γ a γ npq ξ = 0

(II.21)

Components of this equation with different gamma-matrix structure must vanish separately. For example, if we choose m to be an anti-holomorphic index and use (II.20), we
find that G(1,3) , the (1,3) piece of the field G, must be zero:
Gabcd = 0.

(II.22)

Gabcd J cd = 0

(II.23)

Moreover, G(2,2) must be primitive:

Finally, taking the trace over the holomorphic index ‘a’ in the main supersymmetry
condition (II.21), we can demonstrate that the (4,0) part of the G-flux breaks supersymmetry, as we expected in section 2.4. Indeed, we get a relation between G4,0 and mψ of
the form (II.14), but with a different numerical coefficient:
96mψ ∆3/2 ξ ∗ = Gabcd γ abcd ξ
Therefore, compactifications of M-theory on Calabi-Yau four-folds with G4,0 6= 0 lead

to three-dimensional vacua with broken supersymmetry, in accordance with the proposed

expressions (2.38) and (2.41) for the effective superpotential. Indeed, from (2.38) it follows
that (4,0) part of G contributes to the vacuum value of W . Now, in order to see that threedimensional vacua with W 6= 0 are not supersymmetric we must be careful and use the

appropriate covariant derivatives D/Dti and D/Dkj . Since the supersymmetry conditions
(2.36) and (2.37) are scale invariant, there is at least one massless vector multiplet in the
effective three-dimensional theory corresponding to the volume of Y . After this multiplet
is dualized to a massless chiral multiplet K0 , one finds no-scale supergravity theory where
effective superpotential is independent on K0 , see [40], for otherwise this multiplet had a
mass. Since ∂k0 W = 0 but ∂k0 K(ti , kj ) 6= 0, where K(ti , kj ) is the Kähler potential, it

follows that in a vacuum with W 6= 0 the covariant derivative DW/Dk0 = ∂k0 W +(∂k0 K)W

does not vanish, and supersymmetry is broken.

Note, that both G4,0 and primitive G-flux of type (2, 2) are self-dual and, therefore,
obey equations of motion (II.16). As one can easily see, self-duality of G also implies
48

vanishing of the three-dimensional cosmological constant. Indeed, it follows from (2.1)
R
that 12 G ∧∗ G − χ(X)/24 = 0, so that the positive vacuum energy due to the G-flux is

cancelled by the negative contribution of the R4 terms in the effective action of M theory.
In particular, it means that compactification with G-flux of type (4, 0) classically gives a
flat space solution with Λ = 0, cf. [42].
Acknowledgements We have benefited from discussions with M. Bershadsky, N. Hitchin,
S. Katz, J. Louis, R. MacPherson, D. Morrison, T. Pantev, N. Seiberg, A. Shapere, and
S.-T. Yau. We thank J. Polchinski hor helpful and interesting discussions that stimulated
a revision of the analysis of compactifications with G4,0 6= 0 in Appendix II.

The work of S.G. was supported in part by grant RFBR No 98-02-16575 and Russian

President’s grant No 96-15-96939. The work of C.V. was supported in part by NSF grant
PHY-98-02709 and that of E.W. was supported in part by NSF grant PHY-9513835.

49

References
[1] Y. Kazama and H. Suzuki,“New N=2 Superconformal Field Theories and Superstring
Compactification,” Mod. Phys. Lett. A4 (1989) 325.
[2] A.B. Zamolodchikov, JETP Lett. 46 (1987) 160.
[3] C. Vafa and N.P. Warner,“Catastrphes and the Classification of Conformal Theories,”
Phys. Lett. B218 (1989) 51.
[4] E. Martinec,“Algebraic Geometry and Effective Lagrangians,” Phys. Lett. B217
(1989) 431.
[5] E. Witten, “On Flux Quantization In M -Theory And The Effective Action,” J. Geom.
Phys. 22 (1997) 1.
[6] S. Sethi, C. Vafa, and E. Witten, “Constraints on Low Dimensional String Compactifications,” Nucl. Phys. B480 (1996) 213.
[7] B. Greene, D. Morrison, and A. Strominger,“Black hole Condensation and the Unification of String Vacua,” Nucl. Phys. B451 (1995) 109.
[8] K. Becker and M. Becker,“M Theory on Eight Manifolds,” Nucl. Phys. B477 (1996)
155.
[9] G. Tian and S.-T. Yau, “Complete Kähler Manifolds With Zero Ricci Curvature II,
Inv. Math. 106 (1991) 27.
[10] P. Candela and X. C. de la Ossa, “Moduli Space Of Calabi-Yau Manifolds,” Nucl.Phys.
B355 (1991) 455.
[11] W. Lerche, “Fayet-Iliopoulos Potentials From Four-Folds,” JHEP 9711:004 (1997)
[12] E. Witten,“Non-perturbative Superpotentials in String Theory,” Nucl. Phys. B474
(1996) 343.
[13] J. Bagger and E. Witten,“Quantization of Newton’s Constant in Certain Supergravity
Theories,” Phys. Lett. B115 (1982) 202.
[14] J. Polchinski and A. Strominger,“New Vacua for Type II String Theory,” Phys. Lett.
B388 (1996) 736.
[15] S. Gukov, “Solitons, Superpotentials and Calibrations”, Nucl.Phys. B574 (2000) 169,
hep-th/9911011.
[16] A. Kehagias, “New Type IIB Vacua And Their F -Theory Interpretation,” hepth/9805131.
[17] I. Klebanov and E. Witten,“Superconformal Field Theory on Three-Branes at a
Calabi-Yau Singularity,” Nucl. Phys. B536 (1998) 199.
[18] D. Morrison and R. Plesser,“Nonspherical Horizons,” hep-th/9810201.
[19] S. Sethi, “A Relation Between N = 8 Gauge Theories In Three Dimensions,” JHEP
9811:003, 1998, hep-th/9809162.
[20] K. Becker, M. Becker and A. Strominger,“Five-brane, Membranes and Nonperturbative String Theory,” Nucl. Phys. B456 (1995) 130.
50

[21] H. Ooguri and C. Vafa,“Summing up D-instantons,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 77 (1996) 3296.
[22] N. Seiberg and S. Shenker,“ Hypermultiplet Moduli Space and String Compactification
to Three-Dimensions,” Phys. Lett. B388 (1996) 521.
[23] S. Cecotti and C. Vafa,“On Classification of N=2 Supersymmetric Theories,” Commun. Math. Phys. 158 (1993) 569.
[24] S. Cecotti, P. Fendley, K. Intriligator and C. Vafa,“A New Supersymmetric Index,”
Nucl. Phys. 386 (1992) 405.
[25] O. Aharony, A. Hanany, K. Intriligator, N. Seiberg and M.J. Strassler,“Aspects of N=2
Supersymmetric Gauge Theories in Three-Dimensions,” Nucl. Phys. B499 (1997) 67.
[26] D. Kutasov,“A Comment on Duality in N=1 Supersymmetric Non-abelian Gauge
Theories,” Phys. Lett. B351 (1995) 230.
[27] A. Klemm, W. Lerche, P. Mayr, C. Vafa and N. Warner,“Self-dual Strings and N=2
Supersymmetric Field Theory,” Nucl. Phys. B477 (1996) 746.
[28] P. Fendley, S.D. Mathur, C.Vafa and N.P. Warner,“Integrable deformations and scattering matrices for the N=2 supersymmetric discrete series,” Phys. Lett. 243 (1990)
257.
[29] J.M. Rabin, Phys. Lett. B411 (1997) 274.
[30] J. Schulze and N.P. Warner, “BPS Geodesics in N=2 Supersymmetric Yang-Mills
Theory,” Nucl. Phys. B498 (1997) 101.
[31] A. Shapere, C.Vafa, “BPS Structure of Argyres-Douglas Superconformal Theories,”hepth/9910182.
[32] W. Lerche, C. Vafa and N.P. Warner, “Chiral Rings in N=2 Superconformal Theories,”
Nucl. Phys. B324 (1989) 427.
[33] K. Intriligator, “Fusion Residues,” Mod. Phys. Lett. A6 (1991) 3543.
[34] W. Lerche and N.P. Warner,“Polytopes and Solitons in Integrable N=2 Supersymmetric Landau-Ginzburge Theories,” Nucl. Phys. B358 (1991) 571.
[35] A. Kapustin and M. Strassler, “On Mirror Symmetry In Three-Dimensional Abelian
Gauge Theories,” JHEP 9904:021,1999, hep-th/9902033.
[36] P. Candelas, X.C. De la Ossa, P.S. Green and L. Parkes, “A Pair of Calabi-Yau
Manifolds As An Exactly Soluble Superconformal Theory,” Nucl. Phys. B359 (1991)
21.
[37] P. Aspinwall and D. Morrison, “Topological Field Theory and Rational Curves,” Commun. Math. Phys. 151 (1993) 245.
[38] P.C. Argyres and M.R. Douglas,“New Phenomena in SU(3) Supersymmetric Gauge
Theory,” Nucl. Phys. B448 (1995) 93.
[39] P. Griffiths and J. Harris, Principles Of Algebraic Geometry (Wiley-Interscience,
1978).
[40] S. Giddings, S. Kachru, and J. Polchinski, to appear.
[41] L. Alvarez-Gaumé and E. Witten, Nucl.Phys. B234 (1983) 269.
[42] M. Haack, J. Louis, “M-theory compactified on Calabi-Yau fourfolds with background
flux,” hep-th/0103068.
51

