                                                                                                                 hep-th/9605150
                                                                                                                 MRI-PHY/96-14
arXiv:hep-th/9605150v2 30 May 1996




                                                                 F -theory and Orientifolds


                                                                           Ashoke Sen1 2
                                                      Mehta Research Institute of Mathematics
                                                             and Mathematical Physics
                                                 10 Kasturba Gandhi Marg, Allahabad 211002, INDIA

                                                                             Abstract
                                         By analyzing F -theory on K3 near the orbifold limit of K3 we establish the equivalence
                                     between F -theory on K3 and an orientifold of type IIB on T 2 , which in turn, is related by a
                                     T-duality transformation to type I theory on T 2 . By analyzing the F -theory background
                                     away from the orbifold limit, we show that non-perturbative effects in the orientifold
                                     theory splits an orientifold plane into two planes, with non-trivial SL(2,Z) monodromy
                                     around each of them. The mathematical description of this phenomenon is identical to
                                     the Seiberg-Witten result for N=2 supersymmetric SU(2) gauge theory with four quark
                                     flavors. Points of enhanced gauge symmetry in the orientifold / F -theory are in one to
                                     one correspondence with the points of enhanced global symmetry in the Seiberg-Witten
                                     theory.




                                       1
                                          On leave of absence from Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Homi Bhabha Road, Bombay
                                     400005, INDIA
                                        2
                                          E-mail: sen@mri.ernet.in, sen@theory.tifr.res.in

                                                                                   1
1         Introduction and Summary
Besides establishing connections between apparently different string theories, recent de-
velopments in string theory have also provided us with some novel ways of compactifying
string theory. One such procedure, now known as F -theory[1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7], involves type
IIB string compactification where the dilaton and the scalar from the Ramond-Ramond
(RR) sector (which we shall refer to as the axion) are not constant, but vary on the in-
ternal manifold. Given a manifold M that admits elliptic fibration, i.e. has the structure
of a fiber bundle whose fiber is a two dimensional torus and base is some manifold B, one
defines F -theory on M as the type IIB theory on B, with the axion-dilaton modulus of
the type IIB theory being set equal to the complex structure modulus of the fiber. Since
in general this modulus varies as we move on B, the axion-dilaton modulus of the type
IIB theory will vary as we move on B. In particular as we travel along non-trivial closed
cycles on B the fiber can undergo non-trivial SL(2,Z) transformation. This would imply
that the axion-dilaton modulus of the type IIB theory will undergo non-trivial SL(2,Z)
transformation as we move along closed cycles of B.
   Many of the F -theory compactifications have been conjectured to be equivalent to
more conventional compactifications of heterotic string theory. In particular, F -theory
on an elliptically fibered K3 surface has been conjectured to be dual to heterotic string
theory on a two dimensional torus[1]. One of the purposes of this paper is to establish
this equivalence. Like many of the dualities in string theory and M-theory which can
be established by working at the orbifold limit of the compact manifolds[8], the duality
between F -theory on K3 and heterotic string theory on T 2 is established by going to a
special point in the K3 moduli space where it can be identified to a Z2 orbifold of a four
torus. We show that in this limit the F -theory background reduces to a conventional
background where the axion-dilaton modulus remains constant as we move in the internal
space. More specifically this background can be identified to that of an orientifold[9, 10,
11] of type IIB theory which can be analyzed by the conventional conformal field theory
techniques and is in fact related by T -duality to type I string theory on T 2 .3 Thus at
this special point in the moduli space F -theory on K3 is identical to type I theory on
T 2 , which, in turn has been conjectured to be equivalent to heterotic string theory on
T 2 [12, 13, 14, 15]. Once we have established the equivalence between the heterotic string
    3
        We have been informed by C. Vafa that he has independently made a similar observation.



                                                     2
theory on T 2 and F -theory on K3 at a special point in the moduli space, we can argue
that the equivalence must hold at all points in the moduli space since we can deform both
theories away from this specific point by switching on appropriate background fields.
    We also explicitly study deformations of the F -theory, as well as the orientifold the-
ory, away from this special point in the moduli space. The moduli space of the orientifold
theory is characterized by the vacuum expectation value of the Higgs field in the adjoint
representation of the gauge group, or equivalently, locations of the sixteen seven-branes
on the internal two dimensional manifold. On the other hand the F -theory moduli space
is characterized by the moduli of elliptically fibered K3 surfaces. Both theories are de-
scribed by background field configurations which consist of dilaton-axion modulus with
non-trivial dependence on the coordinates of the internal two dimensional manifold. Ex-
plicit comparison of the two sets of field configuration reveals that they are identical in
the two theories at weak coupling, but differ for finite coupling. This difference is non-
perturbative in the coupling constant of the orientifold theory. If we focus on the physics
near one of the four orientifold planes, then the mathematical description of the field
configuration turns out to be identical to the Seiberg-Witten solution of the N=2 super-
symmetric SU(2) gauge theory with four quark flavors[16]. In the analysis of ref.[16] the
moduli space of N=2 supersymmetric SU(2) gauge theory was characterized by a gauge
invariant quantity u, and the complex ‘coupling constant’ τ varies as we move in the u
plane. The F -theory background is identical to this configuration, with u labelling the
coordinate of the base B and τ denoting the axion-dilaton modulus. On the other hand
the orientifold background corresponds to the classical limit of this configuration. As is
well known from the analysis of ref.[16], the classical limit of this background is singular
as Im(τ ) becomes negative in some regions. Thus we expect the F -theory background to
describe the quantum corrected version of the orientifold background.
   The SU(2) gauge theory with four quark flavors is characterized by five parameters,
− the asymptotic value of τ , and the four quark masses in the Yang-Mills theory. In the
orientifold theory, these four mass parameters denote the locations of the four seven branes
around an orientifold plane. (These in turn can be related to the vacuum expectation
value of a scalar field belonging to the adjoint representation of the gauge group SO(8).)
As was discussed in ref.[16], at special points in the space of the parameters mi the N=2
supersymmetric Yang-Mills theory has enhanced global symmetry group G. It turns out
that precisely at these special points the orientifold / F -theory develops enhanced gauge


                                             3
symmetry G.
   It was also noted in ref.[16] that the SL(2,Z) action on τ has to be accompanied by a
triality action on the representations of the global symmetry group SO(8) which transform
the parameters mi in a non-trivial manner. Thus we would expect that in the orientifold
/ F -theory, the SL(2,Z) action on the axion-dilaton modulus will have to be accompanied
by triality action on the representations of the gauge group SO(8), and in particular
on the Higgs vacuum expectation values (locations of seven branes) represented by the
parameters mi . We explicitly verify this triality action of SL(2,Z) in the dual heterotic
string theory on T 2 where SL(2,Z) is part of the T-duality group of the theory.
   Finally, by comparing the masses of BPS states in the F -theory and in the orientifold
theory, we show that in F -theory the masses of BPS states can be expressed in terms of
period integrals of the holomorphic two form on the (complex) surface on which F -theory
is compactified. Whenever one or more of the period integrals vanish, the corresponding
BPS state(s) become massless, and at the same time the surface becomes singular. This
is a reflection of the relationship between singularities of the surface and the appearance
of enhanced gauge symmetries in the corresponding F -theory compactification.
    The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 is devoted to studing the F -theory on K3
at the orbifold limit of K3 and comparing the background field configuration describing
this F -theory compactification with the background of an orientifold of type IIB theory
on T 2 . In section 3 we study deformation of both, the F -theory and the orientifold
backgrounds away from this special point in the moduli space.


2    F -theory on K3 in the Orbifold Limit
Let us begin with the following elliptically fibered K3 surface

                                  y 2 = x3 + f (z)x + g(z)                             (2.1)

where x, y, z ∈ CP 1 , f (z) is a polynomial of degree eight, and g(z) is a polynomial of
degree twelve in z. This describes a torus for each point on CP 1 labelled by the coordinate
z. The modular parameter τ (z) of the torus is determined in terms of the ratio f 3 /g 2
through the relation
                                                4 · (24f )3
                                  j(τ (z)) =                ,                          (2.2)
                                               27g 2 + 4f 3


                                               4
where
                                            (θ18 (τ ) + θ28 (τ ) + θ38 (τ ))3
                                  j(τ ) =                                     .              (2.3)
                                                        η(τ )24
By definition, compactification of F -theory on this particular K3 corresponds to com-
pactification of type IIB theory on CP 1 labelled by z, with

                                       a(z) + ie−Φ(z)/2 = τ (z) .                            (2.4)

Here a denotes the RR scalar field and Φ denotes the dilaton field. Physically such a
background corresponds to a configuration of twenty four seven branes of the type IIB
theory transverse to CP 1 and situated at the zeroes of

                                            ∆ ≡ 4f 3 + 27g 2 .                               (2.5)

In the generic case, the twenty four zeroes of ∆ are distinct from each other and neither
f nor g vanishes at the zeroes of ∆. If zi denotes such a zero of ∆ then from eq.(2.2) and
(2.5) we see that near such a point
                                                             1
                                            j(τ (z)) ∼            .                          (2.6)
                                                           z − zi
This gives
                                                    1
                                        τ (z) ≃        ln(z − zi ) ,                         (2.7)
                                                   2πi
up to SL(2,Z) transformation.
   We shall consider a special point in the moduli space of this compactification where
τ (z) is independent of z. From eq.(2.2) we see that this requires

                                            f 3 /g 2 = constant .                            (2.8)

Since g and f are polynomials in z of order twelve and eight respectively, the solution to
eq.(2.8) is given by
                                      g = φ3 ,               f = αφ2 ,                       (2.9)
where α is a constant and φ is a polynomial in z of degree four. By a rescaling of y and
x we can set the coefficient of z 4 in φ to be one. Thus φ has the form4
                                                    4
                                                    Y
                                             φ=         (z − zi )                           (2.10)
                                                   i=1
  4
      A special case of this where z1 = z2 = 0 and z3 = z4 = ∞ has been discussed in [3].

                                                       5
where zi are constants. From eqs.(2.2), (2.5), (2.9) and (2.10) we get
                                                      4
                                                      Y
                                         3
                               ∆ = (4α + 27)               (z − zi )6 ,                (2.11)
                                                      i=1

and
                                          4 · (24α)3
                                     j(τ ) =         .                            (2.12)
                                          27 + 4α3
Thus this particular compactification corresponds to a configuration where the twenty
four seven-branes are grouped into four sets of six coincident seven-branes, situated at
the points z1 , · · · z4 . τ is constant over CP 1 ; however there is an SL(2,Z) monodromy
                                                          
                                             −1
                                                               ,                       (2.13)
                                                      −1
around each of the points zi . This can be seen by noting that as z moves once around
the point zi , y changes sign. This corresponds to the hyperelliptic involution of the torus,
represented by the SL(2,Z) matrix given in eq.(2.13).
   The metric on the base can be read out from the formulae derived in ref.[17]. Up to
an overall multiplicative constant, it is given by
                                                dzdz̄
                              ds2 = Q              1/2 (z̄ − z̄ )1/2
                                                                     .                 (2.14)
                                       i (z − zi )             i

Thus there is a deficit angle of π at each of the points zi . Thus the base has the geometry
of T 2 /I2 , where I2 acts on the torus by inverting the sign of both the coordinates of the
torus. The modular parameter λ of the torus is determined in terms of the cross ratio
                                     (z1 − z2 )(z3 − z4 )
                                                          ,                            (2.15)
                                     (z1 − z3 )(z2 − z4 )

which is invariant under an SL(2,C) transformation of the base CP 1 .
   This background can now be given an orientifold interpretation as follows. By study-
ing the action of various symmetry transformations on the massless fields of the theory
it is easy to verify that the SL(2,Z) transformation (2.13) can be identified to the trans-
formation (−1)FL · Ω of the type IIB theory, where Ω denotes the orientation reversal
transformation (exchange of left and right moving modes on the world sheet) and (−1)FL
changes the sign of all the Ramond sector states on the left. Thus we have type IIB
compactification on T 2 /I2 such that as we go once around each fixed point on T 2 /I2 the
theory comes back to itself transformed by the symmetry (−1)FL · Ω. In other words,

                                                  6
the theory can be identified to type IIB on T 2 , modded out by the Z2 transformation
(−1)FL · Ω · I2 . This is an orientifold[11], and, as we shall see, is related to type I the-
ory on T 2 by a T -duality transformation. We shall denote this theory as type IIB on
T 2 /(−1)FL · Ω · I2 . In this case, each of the four orientifold planes carry −4 units of seven-
brane charge, which need to be neutralized by putting sixteen seven branes transverse to
T 2 /I2 [11]. At a generic point in the moduli space, where the seven-branes are located at
arbitrary positions on T 2 /I2 , the seven brane charges are not neutralized locally and as
a result τ (z) varies on T 2 /I2 . On the other hand, in order that the field configuration
matches with the one obtained from F -theory, τ (z) must be constant on T 2 /I2 . Thus
the seven-brane charges must be neutralized pointwise on T 2 /I2 . This happens if the
sixteen seven branes are grouped into four sets of four coincident seven-branes, and these
four sets are placed at the four orientifold planes. This would give a field configuration
identical to the one obtained from the F -theory configuration.
   This establishes the equivalence between F -theory compactification on K3 and an
orientifold of type IIB theory at a special point of the moduli space. By making an R →
(1/R) duality transformation on both the circles of T 2 we can map the Z2 transformation
(−1)FL · Ω · I2 to the transformation Ω.5 Since modding out the type IIB theory by Ω
produces type I theory, we see that the orientifold is related by T -duality to type I theory
on T 2 . This in turn has been conjectured to be equivalent to heterotic string theory on
T 2 [12, 13, 14, 15]. Thus through this chain of arguments we have been able to establish the
conjectured duality between F -theory compactification on K3 and heterotic string theory
on T 2 . Although this duality was established only at one point in the moduli space,
we can deform both theories away from this special point by switching on appropriate
background fields, and hence the duality must hold at all points in the moduli space.
   We can also study the enhanced non-abelian gauge symmetries at this special point in
the moduli space, both from the orientifold view point as well as the F -theory viewpoint.
From the orientifold viewpoint we have an SO(8) gauge symmetry associated with each
orientifold plane, since four seven-branes and their images meet there. Thus we get an
(SO(8))4 non-abelian gauge symmetry at this special point. On the other hand, in order
to study the enhancement of gauge symmetry from the F -theory viewpoint, we need
to study what kind of singularities appear at the points zi (1 ≤ i ≤ 4) at this special
point in the moduli space. To see this note that after a suitable rescaling of the various
  5
      This fact has been independently observed in ref.[18].


                                                     7
coordinates, eq.(2.1) near the point z = z1 takes the form:

                                          ye2 ≃ xe3 + αxeze2 + ze3 ,                      (2.16)

where,
               4
               Y                                     4
                                                     Y
                                3/2
      ye = y       (z1 − zi )         ,     xe = x       (z1 − zi ),   ze = (z − z1 ) .   (2.17)
               i=2                                   i=2

This corresponds to a D4 type singularity of the K3 surface and hence corresponds to
an enhanced SO(8) gauge symmetry. Since there are four such singular points, we get a
net non-abelian gauge group (SO(8))4 , in agreement with the answer obtained from the
orientifold analysis.


3    Deforming away from the Orbifold Limit of K3
In this section we shall discuss deforming both the F -theory and the orientifold theory
away from the special point in the moduli space considered in the previous section and
compare the results. In the F -theory such a deformation would correspond to splitting the
six coincident zeroes of ∆ away from each other. On the other hand, for the orientifold,
this corresponds to moving the four coincident seven-branes away from the orientifold
plane. In order to learn the physics of the situation we can focus our attention on one
of the four orientifold planes. Equivalently, instead of studying F theory on the orbifold
T 4 /I4 (where I4 denotes changing the sign of all the four coordinates on T 4 ) and the
type IIB on T 2 /(−1)FL · Ω · I2 , we consider F -theory on T 2 × R2 /I4 and type IIB on
R2 /(−1)FL · Ω · I2 . Let z denote the complex coordinate on R2 /I2 , and z = 0 denote the
fixed point, so that at the special point in the moduli space condsidered in the previous
section the metric takes the form:

                                          ds2 = dzdz̄/z 1/2 z̄ 1/2 .                       (3.1)

Also let τ0 be the constant value of τ away from the singular point. We shall study the
deformation of this background keeping the asymptotic metric fixed to be of the form
(3.1) and asymptotic τ fixed at τ0 . The collective coordinates of this theory describe
an N=1 supersymmetric SO(8) gauge theory in eight dimensions. The moduli space of
this theory is characterized by the vacuum expectation value of the complex scalar field

                                                      8
φ belonging to the adjoint representation of the gauge group. At a generic point in the
moduli space this vacuum expectation value takes the form:
                                                               
                          iσ2 c1
                                                                                       
                                  iσ2 c2                                         0 −i
              hφi =                                            ,      σ2 =                  ,      (3.2)
                                           iσ2 c3                                i 0
                                                       iσ2 c4
where ci are complex parameters.
   First let us describe this deformation in the orientifold theory. In this case the de-
formed configuration will correspond to an orientifold plane carrying −4 units of seven-
brane charge (which we shall take to be fixed at z = 0) and four seven branes at arbitrary
coordinates zi . Note that if we use the freedom of rescaling z we can eliminate one of the
zi ’s from the set of independent parameters, but we do not use this freedom as this will
change the asymptotic form of the metric. These four complex parameters can be related
to the parameters ci introduced earlier by working in the cordinate

                                                 w = z 1/2 ,                                         (3.3)

which is the natural coordinate on R2 (as opposed to z which is the natural coordinate
on R2 /I2 ). In this coordinate system the orientifold plane carries −8 units of seven brane
charge, and there are eight seven branes on R2 distributed in an I2 invariant fashion. ±ci
are the locations of these eight seven branes in R2 [11]. Thus we have

                                                     zi = c2i .                                      (3.4)

    Since the seven-brane charge is no longer neutralized locally, τ is no longer a constant
in the z plane. Naively, we would expect it to be of the form:
                                                  4
                                              1 X                       
                              τ (z) = τ0 +           ln(z − zi ) − 4 ln z ,                          (3.5)
                                             2πi i=1
since there is +1 unit of seven brane charge at each zi , and −4 unit of seven brane charge
at z = 0. This solution is characterized by five parameters, − τ0 and the four zi ’s. A
closer examination of the solution reveals however that the solution does not make sense
everywhere in the z plane. In particular, close to z = 0, Im(τ ) becomes large and negative,
violating the bound Im(τ ) ≥ 0.6 Thus we would expect that strong coupling effects will
   6
    The situation is similar to the result of ref.[15] in one compact dimension, where the supergravity
solution broke down for a sufficiently large separation between the orientifold plane and the eight branes.
In the present case the solution breaks down for arbitrarily small but finite separation between the
orientifold plane and the seven branes due to stronger short distance divergence in two dimensions.

                                                         9
modify the solution near the z = 0 point. We shall now see that the F -theory description
of the background provides us with precisely such a modification. Note however that
due to the high degree of supersymmetry present in the problem, we expect the moduli
space of the theory to remain unmodified by quantum corrections, at least locally. Thus
ci (or equivalently zi ) should continue to label the moduli space of the theory, but the
background field configuration describing the theory will no longer be of the form (3.5).
   From the F -theory viewpoint, the deformation of T 2 × R2 /I4 away from the orbifold
limit is described by a surface of the form

                                     y 2 = x3 + fe(z)x + ge(z) ,                             (3.6)

where fe and ge are now polynomials in z of degree two and three respectively. This gives a
total of seven complex parameters to begin with. Of this one parameter can be removed
by an overall shift of z and another can be removed by a rescaling of x and y. This again
leaves us with five complex parameters. In order to relate these five parameters to those
obtained in the orientifold description it is convenient to choose these five parameters in
a specific manner. In the analysis of N=2 supersymmetric SU(2) gauge theory with four
quark flavors[16] Seiberg and Witten were led to a similar surface parametrized by four
quark masses mi (1 ≤ i ≤ 4) and the complex coupling constant τ0 ≡ (θ/π + 8πi/g 2).
The surface was given by

   y 2 = W1 W2 W3 + A(W1 T1 (e2 − e3 ) + W2 T2 (e3 − e1 ) + W3 T3 (e1 − e2 )) − A2 N ,       (3.7)

where
               Wi = x − ei ze − e2i R,           A = (e1 − e2 )(e2 − e3 )(e3 − e1 ) ,        (3.8)

 e1 − e2 = θ34 (τ0 ),     e3 − e2 = θ14 (τ0 ),    e1 − e3 = θ24 (τ0 ),    e1 + e2 + e3 = 0 , (3.9)
                                                   1
                                           ze = z − e1 R ,                                 (3.10)
                                                   2

                            1X 2
                        R =      m ,
                            2 i i
                             1 X 2 2         1 X 4
                    T1    =        mi mj −         mi ,
                            12 i>j          24 i
                              1Y          1 X 2 2        1 X 4
                    T2    = −      mi −         mi mj +     m ,
                              2 i        24 i>j         48 i i


                                                 10
                             1Y       1 X 2 2        1 X 4
                   T3 =          mi −        mi mj +      mi ,
                             2 i      24 i>j         48 i
                              3 X 2 2 2          1 X 2 4          1 X 6
                    N =               mi mj mk −         mi mj +      mi .                       (3.11)
                             16 i>j>k            96 i6=j         96 i

The surface described by eq.(3.7) is not exactly of the form (3.6) since the coefficient of
the x2 term does not vanish, but this can be removed by an overall z independent shift
in the coordinate x. We shall use the same set of parameters {mi } and τ0 to label the
F -theory background, and show that we get a consistent map between the orientifold
and the F -theory by postulating the following simple relation between the parameters mi
labelling the F -theory and the parameters ci labelling the orientifold:

                                    mi = ci ,             1 ≤ i ≤ 4.                             (3.12)

This would imply that up to an SO(8) gauge transformation, the vacuum expectation
value of the adjoint scalar φ is given by
                                                        
                  iσ2 m1
                                                                                      
                          iσ2 m2                                                0 −i
                                                        ,            σ2 =                  .   (3.13)
                                     iσ2 m3                                     i 0
                                                iσ2 m4
   In the analysis of Seiberg and Witten the coordinate z on the base represented the
gauge invariant modulus representing the square of the Higgs expectation value. There
are six singularities in the z plane, which, in ref[16], signalled the appearance of massless
charged particles at these points in the moduli space. In the weak coupling (large Im(τ0 ))
limit, four of these singularities are located at z ≃ m2i representing points where the four
quarks become massless. The two other singularities are located close to the origin within
a distance of order exp(iπτ0 /2), and represent points where massless monopoles and dyons
appear in the spectrum. Thus in the τ0 → i∞ limit, these two singularities coalesce, and
we recover the semiclassical picture where the SU(2) gauge symmetry is restored at the
origin and the W ± states become massless. Indeed, for large Im(τ0 ) and |z| >> |eiπτ0 /2 |
the solution described in (3.8) can be rewritten as
                                               4
                                           1 X                        
                           τ (z) ≃ τ0 +           ln(z − m2i ) − 4 ln z .                        (3.14)
                                          2πi i=1

The coefficient 4 in front of ln z is due to the fact that the W ± bosons carry twice the
electric charge of a quark, and the relative − sign between the two terms is due to the

                                                  11
fact that the W ± belong to a vector multiplet whose contribution to the β-function has
sign opposite to that of a hypermultiplet. This configuation is identical to the one given
in eq.(3.5) describing the orientifold configuration, provided we identify zi with m2i , i.e.
ci with mi . This shows that in the weak coupling limit the background field configura-
tion corresponding to an orientifold is identical to the one described by F -theory even
away from the special point in the moduli space described in the last section. However,
the background field configuration describing the orientifold breaks down close to the
orientifold point where the coupling constant becomes strong. On the other hand the
F -theory background makes sense everywhere in the z plane. This leads us to conclude
that the F -theory provides the correct description of the background field configuration
of this theory, and the orientifold background must be modified by quantum correction
so as to coincide with the F -theory background. This would imply in particular that the
orientifold plane z = 0 is split into two planes due to quantum corrections, in a manner
analogous to the splitting of the z = 0 point in the moduli space of N=2 supersymmetric
SU(2) gauge theories into two points. The splitting, being of order exp(iπτ0 /2), is non-
perturbative in the orientifold coupling constant, and is not visible in the perturbation
theory.
   The above analysis shows the equality of the parameters mi and ci in the weak cou-
pling limit where we can directly compare the orientifold background with the F -theory
background. We shall now show that eq.(3.12) gives the correct map between the points
of enhanced gauge symmetry in the orientifold and the F -theory descriptions even away
from the weak coupling region. In subsection 3.3 we shall trace the origin of this simple
relation between mi and ci to the fact that mi ± mj are related to the period integrals of
the holomorphic two form on the surface described by eq.(3.7).

3.1    Unbroken Gauge Symmetries
For a Higgs vacuum expectation value of the form (3.2) the unbroken gauge symmetry
is the subgroup of SO(8) that commutes with this matrix. In particular, if n of the ci ’s
are equal and non-zero, then we recover an SU(n) gauge symmetry, whereas if n of them
are equal and zero, we recover an SO(2n) gauge symmetry. In the orientifold description
these enlarged gauge symmetries are associated with coincident seven branes[19]. We
shall now show that with the identification of mi with ci , we get the same enhanced
gauge symmetries in the F -theory at these special points. In the F -theory background

                                             12
described by eq.(3.7), when n of the mi ’s are equal and non-zero, n of the zeroes of ∆,
representing the point where these n quarks become massless in the corresponding SU(2)
gauge theory, coincide. Thus ∆ has an nth order zero, but typically, neither f (z) nor g(z)
vanish there. According to the table in ref.[3] this corresponds to an An−1 type singularity
and hence an enhanced SU(n) gauge symmetry. The case where n of the mi ’s vanish is
somewhat more complicated, and we need to carry out the analysis separately for each n.
The relevant values of n are 2, 3 and 4. For n = 4 all mi ’s vanish, and the equation of the
surface reduces to the form (2.16). This corresponds to a D4 type singularity and hence
the F -theory on such a surface has an enhanced SO(8) gauge symmetry. For n = 3 the
singularity structure near the origin is that of N=2 supersymmetric Yang-Mills theory
with three massless quarks. According to the analysis of Seiberg and Witten, there are
two singularities near the origin. Using the results of ref.[16] one can easily verify that
near one of the singular points ∆ has a fourth order zero with f and g being finite at
that point. According to ref.[3] this corresponds to an A3 type singularity, and hence an
enhanced SU(4) ≡ SO(6) gauge symmetry. Finally, for n = 2, the singularity structure
near the origin is that of an N=2 supersymmetric SU(2) gauge theory with two flavors of
massless quarks. According to the analysis of Seiberg and Witten this theory again has
two singular points near the origin, and at each of these singular points ∆ has a second
order zero where f and g remain finite. Using the table of ref.[3] we see that each of these
singularities is of A1 type, and hence we expect an enhanced SU(2) × SU(2) ≡ SO(4)
gauge symmetry at this point. This shows that the identification of the parameters mi
with ci gives us enhanced gauge symmetries in the F -theory at correct points in the
moduli space.
    In the parameter space of N=2 supersymmetric SU(2) gauge theories with four flavors
of quarks, there are special points of enhanced global symmetry. In particular, when n of
the quark masses are equal but non-zero, we have a global SU(n) symmetry, whereas if n
of the quarks are massless, we have an enhanced global SO(2n) symmetry. The analysis of
the previous paragraph shows that whenever the N=2 supersymmetric SU(2) gauge theory
develops an enhanced global symmetry, the corresponding F -theory develops the same
enhanced gauge symmetry. This has a simple interpretation in view of the identification
of mi with the parameters ci . In the N=2 supersymmetric Yang-Mills theory, the quark
mass matrix is exactly of the form given in (3.13), and the unbroken global symmetry
group at any point in the parameter space is the subgroup of SO(8) that commutes with


                                            13
this matrix. But this is precisely the subgroup of SO(8) that remains unbroken in the
corresponding orientifold / F -theory compactification, since (3.13) represents the vacuum
expectation value of the adjoint Higgs field in this theory. Thus we see that there is a one
to one correspondence between the points of enhanced global symmetries arising in the
supersymmetric Yang-Mills theory and the points of enhanced gauge symmetries arising
in the orientifold / F -theory.

3.2    Triality
We shall now discuss the observation of ref.[16] that SL(2,Z) transformations have a
triality action on the representations of the global symmetry group SO(8). In particular,
the transformation τ → −1/τ acts by exchanging the vector and the spinor representations
of SO(8) and acts on the mass parameters mi as
                                    1
                             m1 →     (m1 + m2 + m3 + m4 ) ,
                                    2
                                    1
                             m2   →   (m1 + m2 − m3 − m4 ) ,
                                    2
                                    1
                             m3   →   (m1 − m2 + m3 − m4 ) ,
                                    2
                                    1
                             m4   →   (m1 − m2 − m3 + m4 ) .                           (3.15)
                                    2
This would imply, in particular, that in the specific orientifold compactification that we are
considering, the action τ0 → −1/τ0 on the asymptotic τ by itself is not a symmetry of the
theory, but it must also act on the locations ci (mi ) of the seven branes (or, equivalently,
on the vacuum expectation values of the adjoint Higgs field) according to eq.(3.15).
    Is there a way to verify this independently? From the point of view of the type IIB
orientifold, the symmetry τ → −1/τ is a non-perturbative symmetry, and hence the action
of this transformation on the representation of the gauge group will be difficult to study
explicitly. However, by using the type I − heterotic equivalence in ten dimensions, or
equivalently, the F -theory − heterotic duality in eight dimensions, one can map the non-
perturbative S-duality transformation of the orientifold theory to a perturbative T-duality
transformation in the heterotic string theory, where the action of this transformation on
the representations of the gauge group can be studied explicitly. To do this we need to
first patch together four copies of the solution we have been discussing so as to describe
type IIB compactification on T 2 /(−1)FL ·Ω·I2 . This can easily be done when the distance

                                             14
between the fixed points is large compared to the distance between any given fixed point
and the four seven-branes around it. For this we rewrite eq.(3.7) (after a constant shift
of x and a suitable rescaling of x and y) as

                     y 2 = x3 + xα(τ0 )fe(z, {mi }, τ0 ) + ge(z, {mi }, τ0 ) ,                   (3.16)

where α(τ0 ) is given by eq.(2.12), and fe and ge are polynomials in z of degree two and
three respectively, with the coefficients of the leading power in z set equal to one in both
of them. Then the equation of the full K3 surface, obtained by patching together four of
these solutions will be given by
                             4
                             Y                                 4
                                                               Y
                                                 (s)                               (s)
        y 2 = x3 + xα(τ0 )         fe(z − zs , {mi }, τ0 ) +         ge(z − zs , {mi }, τ0 ) ,   (3.17)
                             s=1                               s=1

where fe and ge are the same functions that appear in eq.(3.16). With the help of an
SL(2,C) transformation on z, we can set (z1 , z2 , z3 ) = (0, 1, −1). The solution is then
                                      (s)
characterized by the set of sixteen {mi } (1 ≤ i ≤ 4, 1 ≤ s ≤ 4), τ0 and z4 . When all the
mi ’s associated with all the four orbifold points vanish, this K3 surface is described by
eq.(2.1) with g and f given by eqs.(2.9), (2.10). The unbroken symmetry group in this
theory is (SO(8))4 . Since the same τ0 represents the value of τ away from each of the
four fixed points on T 2 /I2 , the τ0 → −1/τ0 transformation must exchange the vector and
the spinor representation of each SO(8).
   We shall now verify this explicitly by mapping this to the dual heterotic description.
For this we regard this as an orientifold, and make R → (1/R) T-duality transformation
in each of the compact directions (which we shall denote by the coordinates x8 and x9 )
to map this into type I theory on T 2 . In this process the RR scalar, that forms the
                                 ′
real part of τ , gets mapped to B89 where B ′ denotes the rank two anti-symmetric tensor
in the RR sector. Under the type I - heterotic duality, this gets mapped to B89 where
B denotes the rank two anti-symmetric tensor in the heterotic string theory. Thus τ
gets mapped to the Kahler modulus of the heterotic string theory on T 2 , and hence the
S-duality group SL(2,Z) of the orientifold theory gets mapped to the SL(2,Z) T-duality
symmetry of the SO(32) heterotic string theory compactified on T 2 . In particular the
transformation τ → −1/τ will correspond to R → 1/R duality on both the circles in the
heterotic string theory, together with an exchange of the coordinates x8 and x9 . We shall
denote this transformation by σ and show that it induces a triality transformation on the
representations on (SO(8))4 ⊂ SO(32).

                                                       15
   We need to study the SO(32) heterotic string theory near a point in the moduli space
where the SO(32) gauge group has been broken down to (SO(8))4 . This corresponds to
introducing SO(32) Wilson lines U8 and U9 along x8 and x9 given by
                                                                              
                 −I8                                       −I8
                      −I8                                     I8              
                                                                              
       U8 =                            ,        U9 =                           ,   (3.18)
                            I8                                     −I8        
                                  I8                                        I8
where In denotes n × n identity matrix. We shall analyze this theory using the fermionic
description of the heterotic string theory. Without the Wilson lines, the SO(32) heterotic
string contains a conformal field theory of 32 free left-moving Majorana fermions, and this
conformal field theory is modded out by a Z2 transformation that changes the sign of all
the thirty two fermions[20]. This Z2 modding out is responsible for the GSO projection on
the left, and the existence of twisted sector states belonging to the spinor representation
of SO(32). We shall group the 32 fermions into four groups of eight each and denote this
Z2 transformation as (− − −−) in order to denote that is acts as −I8 on all four groups
of fermions. Introduction of the Wilson lines (3.18) corresponds to further modding out
the theory by a Z2 × Z2 transformation, generated by

                                  (− − ++)(x8 → x8 + π) ,                              (3.19)

and
                                  (− + −+)(x9 → x9 + π) .                              (3.20)
We shall use the convention in which the transformation −I8 of SO(8) changes the sign of
the vector (v) and the conjugate spinor (c) representations of SO(8) but leaves the spinor
(s) representations of SO(8) invariant. Let us now consider an untwisted sector state
that transforms in the vector representations of the first two SO(8). We shall denote such
a state by (v1 v2 ). This state is even under (− − ++) and odd under (− + −+). Thus
invariance under (3.19) and (3.20) requires that the state carries even unit of momentum
along x8 and odd unit of momentum along x9 . The duality transformation σ converts this
to a state carrying odd unit of winding along x8 and even unit of winding along x9 . In
other words, this would correspond to a state in the twisted sector of (3.19). Such a state
belongs to the conjugacy class (s1 s2 ). Similar analysis shows that the transformation
σ takes a state in the conjugacy class (vi vj ) to the conjugacy class (si sj ) for all i, j.
(Due to the twisting by the (− − −−) transformation that commutes with σ, we do not

                                             16
distinguish between conjugacy classes (si sj ) and (sk sl ) if (i, j, k, l) is a permutation of the
set (1, 2, 3, 4).) This shows that σ does exchange the vector and spinor representations of
each of the four SO(8)’s as expected from the F -theory description.
   From the analysis of ref.[16] we also know that the transformation τ → τ +1 induces an
SO(8) parity transformation. Thus we would expect that in type IIB on T 2 /(−1)FL ·Ω·I2 ,
τ → τ + 1 must be accompanied by a parity transformation in all four SO(8)’s. This
however corresponds to the SO(32) gauge transformation
                                                                      
                              I7
                                                                      
                                  −1                                  
                                                                      
                                       I7                             
                                                                      
                                            −1                        
                                                                      
                                                                       .                  (3.21)
                          
                                                  I7                  
                                                                       
                                                       −1             
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                            I7        
                                                                  −1
Since (3.21) by itself is a symmetry of the theory, in this theory τ → τ + 1 is also a
symmetry by itself without being accompanied by any action on the Higgs field. As
a result we do not expect to see any non-trivial action of this transformation on the
representations of (SO(8))4 in the dual heterotic string theory.

3.3     BPS States
At a generic point in the moduli space, type IIB on R2 /(−1)FL · Ω · I2 has BPS states
representing the SO(8) gauge bosons and their superpartners that have become massive
due to Higgs vacuum expectation value of the form (3.2). In the orientifold description
these correspond to elementary strings starting on one of the four seven branes and end-
ing on another seven brane. Due to the presence of the orientifold plane there are two
topologically distinct ways an open string can stretch between two seven branes. We shall
call one of them the direct route, and the other one, differing from the direct route by one
unit of winding around the orientifold plane, the indirect route. In the natural coordinate
system w on R2 defined in (3.3) the direct route is a straight line joining the points mi
and mj and the indirect route is a straight line joining the points mi and −mj . With
suitable convention for the sign of {mi }, the mass of a BPS state represented by an open
string stretched between the ith seven brane and the jth seven-brane along the direct
route is given by mi − mj . On the other hand the BPS state corresponding to an open

                                                  17
string stretched between the ith and the jth seven brane along the indirect route has a
mass given by mi + mj .
    From our previous discussion about the relationship between the orientifold and the
F -theory background, it is clear how to represent these BPS states in the corresponding
F -theory description. The description is in fact identical to the one given in the orientifold
theory, except that winding around the orientifold plane will correspond to winding around
the two seven-branes (which we shall label as the fifth and the sixth seven brane) into
which the orientifold plane splits. We would now like to ask if the masses of these BPS
states can be expressed in terms of some natural objects in the F -theory. This is important
since the parameters mi were introduced via eq.(3.7)-(3.11) in an ad hoc fashion in order
to parametrize the F -theory background and hence one would like to know if there is
any reason why the masses of BPS states should have simple expression in terms of these
parameters. We shall now see that these masses can in fact be expressed in terms of
natural objects in the F -theory.
    For a given open string BPS state starting at the ith seven brane and ending at the
j-th seven brane, let us introduced a closed curve C in the z plane that travels around
the ith seven brane in anti-clockwise direction, goes to the jth seven brane following the
contour of the open string, travels it in the clockwise direction, and comes back to the ith
seven-brane by following the contour of the open string in the opposite direction. Then
the mass of the open string state can be written as
                                            I
                                                ∂z aD ,                                 (3.22)
                                            C

with aD as defined in ref.[16]. (Note that we have renamed the variable u in ref.[16] as
z). To test the validity of eq.(3.22) we simply use the fact[16] that as we move around
the ith seven brane in the anti-clockwise direction
                                                    
                                  aD       aD + a + mi
                                       →                 .                              (3.23)
                                   a             a
With the help of this equation, (3.22) reproduces the mass formula (mi − mj ) for the
open string state stretched between the ith and the jth string along the direct route. On
the other hand, along
                    aclosed curve that winds once around the fifth and the sixth seven
                    aD
branes, the vector       suffers a monodromy represented by the matrix[16]
                     a
                                                     
                                            −1 4
                                                          .                             (3.24)
                                             0 −1

                                                18
Thus the shift aD → aD − a − mj , when transported along such a curve, corresponds to a
shift aD → aD − a + mj . As a result, (3.22) evaluated along the curve C associated with
the indirect route between the ith and the jth seven brane gives an answer mi + mj . This
agrees with the mass formula obtained from the orientifold theory.
   We shall now try to reexpress (3.22) in terms of integral of the holomorphic two form
on the surface (3.7) along a closed two cycle. For this we note that[16]
                                                  I
                                        aD =          λ,                            (3.25)
                                                  b

where λ is the one form introduced in section 17 of ref.[16], and b denotes the b cycle of
the torus represented by eq.(3.7) for fixed z. We can then reexpress (3.22) as
                                    I        I        I
                                        ∂z       λ=        ω,                       (3.26)
                                    C        b        S

where
                                            dx ∧ dz
                                   ω ≡ dλ ∝         ,                             (3.27)
                                               y
is the holomorphic two form on the surface described by eq.(3.7) and S is the two (real)
dimensional surface swept out by the b cycle of the torus as we move along the closed
curve C in the z plane. Since aD comes back to aD up to a constant shift on being
transported around the curve C, the b-cycle of the torus comes back to the b cycle on
being transported around C, and hence S is a closed surface. Note that in defining the
surface S we had to choose a specific cycle on the torus which we defined as the b-cycle,
and hence broke manifest SL(2, Z) symmetry of the mass formula. But this is expected
since we are analyzing states that arise from elementary strings stretched between two
seven-branes, and elementary strings are not invariant under SL(2,Z) transformation[21].
In particular, the mass formula given in eq.(3.26) is to be multiplied by the square root
of the string tension of the elementary string.
    Eq.(3.26) gives an expression for the masses of BPS states in F -theory on a (complex)
surface in terms of period integrals of the holomorphic two form on this surface. When
one or more of these period integrals vanish, the surface becomes singular, and at the
same time the corresponding BPS states become massless, signalling the appearance of
enhanced gauge symmetries in the theory.
Acknowledgement: I wish to thank J. Blum, R. Gopakumar, A. Hanany, K. Intrilli-
gator, S. Mukhi, C. Vafa and especially E. Witten for many useful discussions. I would

                                                 19
also like to acknowledge the hospitality of the Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton,
during the course of the work. This work was partially supported by a grant from Monell
Foundation.


References
 [1] C. Vafa, hep-th/9602022.

 [2] D. Morrison and C. Vafa, hep-th/9602114.

 [3] D. Morrison and C. Vafa, hep-th/9603161.

 [4] N. Seiberg and E. Witten, hep-th/9603003.

 [5] E. Witten, hep-th/9603150; hep-th/9604030.

 [6] S. Ferrara, R. Minasian and A. Sagnotti, hep-th/9604097.

 [7] P. Aspinwall and M. Gross, hep-th/9605131.

 [8] A. Sen, hep-th/9603113; hep-th/9604070.

 [9] A. Sagnotti, ‘Open Strings and their Symmetry Groups’, Talk at Cargese Summer
    Inst., 1987;
    G. Pradisi and A. Sagnotti, Phys. Lett. B216 (1989) 59;
    M. Bianchi, G. Pradisi and A. Sagnotti, Nucl. Phys. B376 (1992) 365.

[10] P. Horava, Nucl. Phys. B327 (1989) 461, Phys. Lett. B231 (1989) 251.

[11] E. Gimon and J. Polchinski, hep-th/9601038;
     J. Polchinski, S. Choudhuri and C. Johnson, hep-th/9602052;
     and references therein.

[12] E. Witten, Nucl. Phys. B443 (1995) 85 [hep-th/9503124].

[13] A. Dabholkar, Phys. Lett.B357 (1995) 307 [hep-th/9506160].

[14] C. Hull, Phys. Lett. B357 (1995) 545 [hep-th/9506194].

[15] J. Polchinski and E. Witten, hep-th/9510169.

                                          20
[16] N. Seiberg and E. Witten, Nucl. Phys. B431 (1994) 484 [hep-th/9408099].

[17] B. Greene, A. Shapere, C. Vafa and S.-T. Yau, Nucl. Phys. B337 (1990) 1.

[18] A. Dabholkar and J. Park, hep-th/9604178.

[19] E. Witten, Nucl. Phys. B460 (1996) 335 [hep-th/9510135].

[20] D. Gross, J. Harvey, E. Martinec and R. Rohm, Phys. Rev. Lett.54 (1985) 502; Nucl.
     Phys. B256 (1985) 253; Nucl. Phys. B267 (1986) 75.

[21] J. Schwarz, Phys. Lett. B360 (1995) 13 [hep-th/9508143].




                                          21
