                                                                                                                                           BU-HEP-98-7
                                                                                                                            DOE/ER/40561-358-INT98-00-6
                                                                                                                                          UW/PT-97/24
                                                                                                                                         hep-th/9803132




                                                                 Effective Field Theory, Black Holes,
                                                                   and the Cosmological Constant
                                                                Andrew G. Cohena , David B. Kaplanb and Ann E. Nelsonc
arXiv:hep-th/9803132v2 31 Mar 1999




                                                          (a) Department of Physics, Boston University, Boston, MA 02215, USA
                                             (b) Institute for Nuclear Theory, 1550, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195-1550, USA
                                                (c) Department of Physics 1560, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195-1560, USA




                                                  Bekenstein has proposed the bound S ≤ πMP2 L2 on the total entropy S in a volume L3 . This
                                               non-extensive scaling suggests that quantum field theory breaks down in large volume. To recon-
                                               cile this breakdown with the success of local quantum field theory in describing observed particle
                                               phenomenology, we propose a relationship between UV and IR cutoffs such that an effective field
                                               theory should be a good description of Nature. We discuss implications for the cosmological constant
                                               problem. We find a limitation on the accuracy which can be achieved by conventional effective field
                                               theory: for example, the minimal correction to (g − 2) for the electron from the constrained IR and
                                               UV cutoffs is larger than the contribution from the top quark.




                                     e-mail: cohen@andy.bu.edu
                                             dbkaplan@phys.washington.edu
                                             anelson@phys.washington.edu
   It is generally assumed that particle physics can be accurately described by an effective field theory with an
ultraviolet (UV) cutoff less than the Planck mass MP , provided that all momenta and field strengths are small
compared with this cutoff to the appropriate power. Computations performed with such effective field theories, for
example the Standard Model, have been extraordinarily successful at describing properties of elementary particles.
Nevertheless, considerations involving black holes suggest that the underlying theory of Nature is not a local quantum
field theory. In this Letter we attempt to reconcile this conclusion with the success of effective quantum field theory
by determining the range of validity for a local effective field theory to be an accurate description of the world. We
accomplish this by imposing a relationship between UV and infrared (IR) cutoffs. We will argue that this proposed IR
bound does not conflict with any current experimental success of quantum field theory, but explains why conventional
effective field theory estimates of the cosmological constant fail so miserably.
   For an effective quantum field theory in a box of size L with UV cutoff Λ the entropy S scales extensively, S ∼ L3 Λ3∗ .
However the peculiar thermodynamics of black holes [1,2] has led Bekenstein [1] to postulate that the maximum
entropy in a box of volume L3 behaves non-extensively, growing only as the area of the box. For any Λ, there is a
sufficiently large volume for which the entropy of an effective field theory will exceed the Bekenstein limit. ’t Hooft [3]
and Susskind [4] have stressed that this result implies conventional 3 + 1 dimensional field theories vastly over-count
degrees of freedom: as these field theories are described in terms of a Lagrange density, they have extensivity of the
entropy built in. The Bekenstein entropy bound may be satisfied in an effective field theory if we limit the volume of
the system according to
                                                 L3 Λ3 <         2 2
                                                       ∼ SBH ≡ πL MP                                                         (1)
where SBH is the entropy of a black hole of radius L [2,1]. Consequently the length L, which acts as an IR cutoff,
cannot be chosen independently of the UV cutoff, and scales as Λ−3 .
   As startling as the Bekenstein-motivated constraint eq. (1) seems, there is evidence that conventional quantum field
theory fails at an entropy well below this bound. ’t Hooft has stressed that ordinary field theories should fail on large
scales if near the horizon of a black hole [3]. In the presence of even a very large black hole, a low energy description
of particle physics is expected to be inadequate, since infalling particles experience Planck scale interactions with
outgoing Hawking radiation near the horizon. Furthermore, it has been shown in string theory that local observables
do not necessarily commute at space-like separation in the presence of a black hole [5]. These problems arise even
in the absence of any large field strengths or momenta. Local quantum field theory appears unlikely to be a good
effective low energy description of any system containing a black hole, and should probably not attempt to describe
particle states whose volume is smaller than their corresponding Schwarzschild radius.
   An effective field theory that can saturate eq. (1) necessarily includes many states with Schwarzschild radius much
larger than the box size. To see this, note that a conventional effective quantum field theory is expected to be
capable of describing a system at a temperature T , provided that T ≤ Λ; so long as T ≫ 1/L, such a system has
thermal energy M ∼ L3 T 4 and entropy S ∼ L3 T 3 . When eq. (1) is saturated, at T ∼ (MP2 /L)1/3 , the corresponding
Schwarzschild radius LS for this system is LS ∼ L(LMP )2/3 ≫ L.
   To avoid these difficulties we propose an even stronger constraint on the IR cutoff 1/L which excludes all states that
lie within their Schwarzschild radius. Since the maximum energy density in the effective theory is Λ4 , the constraint
on L is
                                                      L3 Λ4 <   2
                                                            ∼ LMP .                                                          (2)
Here the IR cutoff scales like Λ−2 . This bound is far more restrictive than eq. (1): when eq. (2) is near saturation,
the entropy is
                                                                   3/4
                                                       Smax ≃ SBH .                                                          (3)
We propose that an effective local quantum field theory will be a good approximate description of physics when eq. (2)
is satisfied. This bound is more restrictive than eq. (1) because we are explicitly considering only those states that
can be described by conventional quantum field theory† .



                                                                                   3
 ∗
    For example, a free Weyl fermion on a lattice of size L and spacing 1/Λ has 4(LΛ) states and entropy S = (LΛ)3 ln 4 (ignoring
lattice doublers); a lattice theory of bosons represented by a compact field likewise has entropy scaling as (LΛ)3 .
  †                                                                                               3/4
    The fact that systems which do not contain black holes have maximum entropy of order SBH is well known [1,3,6]. The
entropy of black holes has been explicitly counted in string theory [7] and M-theory [8] and appears to involve many states
which are not describable within ordinary field theory.


                                                               1
   Can such a dramatic depletion of quantum states be relevant to the cosmological constant problem‡ ?
   If the Standard Model is valid in an arbitrarily large volume up to at least LEP energies, then the quantum
contribution to the vacuum energy density computed in perturbation theory is ∼ (100 GeV)4 . The empirical bound on
the cosmological constant corresponds to a vacuum energy density <    ∼ (10
                                                                            −2.5
                                                                                 eV)4 . Conventionally this discrepancy is
explained by either unknown physics at high energies which conspires to cancel this vacuum contribution to enormous
precision, or else new physics at ∼ 10−2.5 eV which adjusts to cancel the vacuum energy while being devious enough
to escape detection [11,12].
   There is however a third possibility—that the usual perturbative computation of the quantum correction to the
vacuum energy density, which assumes no infrared limitation to the quantum field theory, is incorrect. There is in
fact no evidence that fields at present experimental energies can fluctuate independently over a region as large as our
horizon. In fact, if we choose an IR cutoff comparable to the current horizon size, the corresponding UV cutoff from
eq. (2) is Λ ∼ 10−2.5 eV and the resulting quantum energy density of Λ4 requires no cancellation to be consistent
with current bounds. This observation does not predict the cosmological constant’s value, as one can always add a
constant to the quantum contribution. However it does eliminate the need for fine-tuning.
   The peculiar relationship between IR and UV cutoffs eq. (2) is, in principle, testable as it limits the successful
application of quantum field theory to experiment. For instance if we wish to search for new physics (coming from
new interactions or particles at high energies which do not violate low energy symmetries) using high precision
experiments at low energies p, there is a maximal energy scale that can be probed without incorporating effects
beyond conventional quantum field theory. Surprisingly, this scale depends on p, and can be much lower than MP .
   In order to perform an effective field theory calculation we simultaneously impose a UV and an IR cutoff consistent
with eq. (2). There will be small discrepancies between such a calculation and a conventional one performed in an
infinite box. Such a discrepancy can be of interest when trying to discover new physics through radiative corrections.
For example, consider (g − 2) for the electron. The UV and IR cutoffs that we must impose each lead to corrections
to the usual calculation, whose total size is
                                                        "                2 #
                                                     α  me 2         1
                                          δ(g − 2) ∼             +                                                    (4)
                                                     π     Λ         me L

If we were able to choose L independently of Λ we would simply ignore the IR corrections. However we must now
comply with eq. (2). Substituting this constraint on L gives
                                                   "                   2 #
                                                                 Λ2
                                                              
                                                 α  me  2
                                    δ(g − 2) >∼ π           +               .                              (5)
                                                      Λ         me M P

This uncertainty in our calculation is minimized by choosing the UV cutoff to be Λ ∼ (m2e MP )1/3 ∼ 14 TeV, so that
                                                                    2/3
                                                        α       me              α
                                       δmin (g − 2) ∼                       ∼     × 10−15 .                                 (6)
                                                        π       MP              π

While still small, this deviation is far larger than the usual effects one would ascribe to gravity. In fact, the minimal
discrepancy in the calculation of (g − 2) that arises in this way is equivalent to the contribution from a lepton of mass
M ∼ 100 GeV, and is roughly twice the contribution to (g − 2) from the top quark§ . These effects are enormously
larger than conventional estimates of Planck scale corrections which are of order (me /MP )2 ∼ 10−44 .
   More generally, we may consider processes of characteristic energy p which receive contributions from dimen-
sion D operators with D > 4, characterizing new physics. The correction due to a finite UV cutoff is of order



 ‡
   Banks has also argued that a drastically reduced number of fundamental degrees of freedom may be part of an explanation of
the small size of the cosmological constant [9]. His explanation differs from ours as he uses the weaker Bekenstein bound on the
UV cutoff, and assumes both an IR cutoff which is much larger than the present horizon, as well as substantial cancellations
of the zero-point energies of the fundamental degrees of freedom due to supersymmetry in a 2+1 dimensional “holographic”
description. Horava [10] has proposed a model with nonextensive fundamental degrees of freedom which also gives suppression
of the cosmological constant.
 §
   The conventional contribution of a new heavy lepton of mass M to (g − 2) is [13] ∆(g − 2) = (1/45) (α/π)2 (me /M )2 , where
me is the electron mass.


                                                                 2
(α/π) (p/Λ)(D−4) . The required IR cutoff L <           2                                               2 2
                                                ∼ MP /Λ leads to additional corrections ∼ (α/π) (1/(L p )), which are
                           2          2
at least as big as (α/π) (Λ /(pMP )) , according to our constraint eq. (2). Minimization of this theoretical uncertainty
occurs for a UV cutoff Λ ∼ p(MP /p)2/D . Thus in a given experiment there is a maximum energy scale that can be
probed and a maximum accuracy that can be achieved using conventional quantum field theory, with the energy scale
                                                                                                           2/5
depending on MP to a remarkably small fractional power. For operators of dimension 5 this scale is MP , while for
                                    1/3
operators of dimension six it is MP .
   Note that the relative size of these effects grows with p. When p is the weak scale and the effective theory is the
Standard Model, new physics at short distances appears in the effective theory through dimension six operators, and
the maximum energy scale that can be conventionally probed is 108 GeV, with a corresponding uncertainty of 10−13 .
If the new high energy physics appears through dimension five operators the maximum energy scale would be 109 GeV
with an uncertainty of 10−9 .
   We might worry that the low scale which can be probed by electroweak physics eliminates the possibility of com-
puting coupling constant unification, which involves an energy scale MGUT ∼ 1016 GeV. However it is still possible
to consider running of dimension four operators up to energies as high as MP . In order to compute coupling con-
stant running in the presence of our IR and UV cutoffs, we may use a renormalization group treatment, matching
the S-matrices of two theories with parameters {L, Λ} and {L′ , Λ′ } (each of which obey eq. (2)) in their combined
domain of validity. There is an inherent uncertainty in the beta function at a given energy scale due to the effects of
these cutoffs. Choosing {L, Λ} at each energy scale to minimize the uncertainty∗∗ , leads to corrections of the relation
between the unified coupling at MGUT and the Standard Model gauge couplings at MZ :
                              4π           4π               mz
                                    =              + bi ln      + O((MGUT /MP )2/3 ) .                                    (7)
                           αi (MZ )   αGUT (MGUT )         MGUT

These corrections are small, but comparable to the usual 2-loop corrections, and are not obviously out of experimental
reach. Thus if one had a compelling reason to believe in a particular GUT with a unification scale well below MP , one
might be able to use visible deviations from its low energy coupling constant predictions as evidence for the limitations
of quantum field theory proposed here.
   As our renormalization group analysis of gauge coupling flow differs from the conventional analysis by only small
corrections, one might expect to obtain conventional results for the RG flow of the vacuum energy as well, recovering
the usual fine-tuning problem associated with the cosmological constant, arising from quartic divergences. However,
in order to match two theories with cutoffs {L, Λ} and {L′ , Λ′ } by requiring that they reproduce the same physical
vacuum energy density λ — by comparing graviton√propagators about a flat metric, for example — the lengths L and
L′ both must be larger than the length scale Mp / λ, in order to avoid spurious finite volume effects. This implies
that one cannot perform the RG scaling to UV cutoffs larger λ(1/4) , and that consequently one never sees a fine tuning
problem for the vacuum energy.
   It is conceivable that black holes and their interactions with particles can be described by some effective field theory,
eliminating the motivation for the bound of eq. (2). It remains difficult to understand the necessary non-extensive
behavior of the entropy without some infrared limitation of effective field theory at least as strong as the Bekenstein-
motivated bound of eq. (1). However even this latter bound leads to conclusions qualitatively similar to those above.
For example experiments at a scale p sensitive to new physics which arises through dimension D operators (D > 4)
                                                              1/(D+2)
would be limited to probing energies below Λ ∼ pD−2 MP4                , and the maximum theoretical accuracy would be
                  4(D−4)/(D+2)
∼ (α/π)(p/MP )                 .
   Both bounds give relatively large corrections to effective field theory computations compared to conventional com-
putable quantum gravitational effects. The latter are generally expected to be suppressed by integral powers of MP ;
such expectations are born out by explicit constructions of effective field theories from string theory [14].
   It is tempting to consider a less drastic solution: patching up conventional effective field theory (with a Planck scale
UV cutoff and no IR cutoff) by eliminating “by hand” those states corresponding to black holes. We do not know
how to prune a Hilbert space in this manner; the result would likely be a bizarre, nonlocal theory. Still, one could
imagine that even though most of the degrees of freedom in an effective field theory in an arbitrarily large box have no
sensible physical interpretation, for some reason the theory accurately describes the properties of few particle states.
This would leave conventional calculations which contain no intermediate states approaching black hole formation



 ∗∗
    In the Standard Model or in the MSSM, UV cutoff effects enter via dimension-six operators involving gauge field strengths,
such as Gaµν ∂ 2 Gaµν .


                                                              3
unchanged to low orders in perturbation theory, while rejecting the numerous states predicted by the same theory
which lie within their own Schwarzschild radius, however there would be drastic effects on thermal distributions even
at temperatures T ≪ Λ. Instead, our main assumption is that a local effective field theory which correctly describes
all single particle states with momenta up to p ∼ Λ, should also describe multi-particle excitations, and would have a
normal density matrix for thermal distributions with T ≪ Λ. While conventional, this assumption may not be valid
when the underlying theory is not local. The alternative that an effective field theory can be valid up to a scale Λ for
certain calculations, but fail to correctly describe a thermal system at temperature T ≪ Λ, seems at least as strange
as our assumption.
   In conclusion, many different results about the physics of black holes imply that, in the presence of quantum
gravity, there are no fundamental extensive degrees of freedom. Furthermore, considerations of the maximum possible
entropy of systems which do not contain black holes suggest that ordinary quantum field theory may not be valid
for arbitrarily large volumes, but would apply provided the UV and IR cutoffs satisfy a bound given by eq. (2). The
experimental success of quantum field theory survives, as long as this effective theory is not applied to calculations
which simultaneously require both a low infrared cutoff and an overly high UV cutoff. The simultaneous UV and
IR sensitivity of computations relevant for current laboratory experiments never comes close to requiring cutoffs
which violate eq. (2). In contrast, the computation of the quantum contribution to the vacuum energy of the visible
universe within quantum field theory requires a UV cutoff of less then 10−2.5 eV. With this cutoff, no fine-tuned
cancellation of the cosmological constant is required. Recognition that quantum field theory vastly overcounts states
can help resolve the enormous discrepancy between conventional estimates of the vacuum energy and the observed
cosmological constant and eliminate a celebrated fine-tuning problem.


Acknowledgements. We gratefully acknowledge Tom Banks for very useful discussions, and the Aspen Center for
Physics, where this work was initiated. We also thankfully acknowledge critical correspondence from Finn Larsen,
Steve Giddings, Petr Horava, Juan Maldacena, Yossi Nir, Joe Polchinski and an anonymous referee. A.G.C. is
supported in part by DOE grant #DE-FG02-91ER40676; D.B.K. is supported in part by DOE grant #DOE-ER-
40561; A.E.N. is supported in part by DOE grant #DE-FG03-96ER40956.




                                                           4
 [1] J. D. Bekenstein, Black Holes and Entropy, Phys. Rev. D7, 2333 (1973); Generalized Second Law of Thermodynamics in
     Black Hole Physics, Phys. Rev. D9, 3292 (1974); A Universal Upper Bound On The Entropy to Energy Ratio for Bounded
     Systems, Phys. Rev. D23, 287 (1981); Entropy Bounds and Black Hole Remnants, gr-qc/9307035, Phys. Rev. D49, 1912
     (1994).
 [2] S. W. Hawking, Particle Creation by Black Holes, Commun. Math. Phys.43, 199 (1975); Black Holes and Thermodynamics,
     Phys. Rev. D13, 191 (1976).
 [3] G. ’t Hooft, Dimensional Reduction in Quantum Gravity, gr-qc/9310026, published in Salamfestschrift: a collection
     of talks, Eds. A. Ali, J. Ellis, and S. Randjbar-Daemi, World Scientific, 1993.
 [4] L. Susskind, The World as a Hologram, hep-th/9409089, J. Math. Phys 36, 6377 (1994).
 [5] D. A. Lowe, J. Polchinski, L. Susskind, L. Thorlacius, and J. Uglum, Black Hole Complementarity Versus Locality, hep-
     th/9506138, Phys. Rev. D52, 6997 (1995).
 [6] D. N. Page, Physics Today 30, 1 (1977), Black Hole Formation in a Box, Gen. Rel. and Grav. 13, 1117 (1981); R. D.
     Sorkin, R. M. Wald, and Z. Z. Jiu, Entropy of Self Gravitating Radiation, Gen. Rel. and Grav. 13, 1127 (1981).
 [7] A. Strominger and C. Vafa, Microscopic Origin of the Bekenstein-Hawking Entropy, hep-th/9601029, Phys. Lett. B379,
     99 (1996).
 [8] J. Maldacena, A. Strominger, and E. Witten, Black Hole Entropy in M-Theory, hep-th/9711053.
 [9] T. Banks, SUSY Breaking, Cosmology, Vacuum Selection and the Cosmological Constant in String Theory, hep-th/9601151.
[10] P. Horava, M Theory as a Holographic Field Theory, hep-th/9712130.
[11] S. Weinberg, The Cosmological Constant Problem, Rev. Mod. Phys. 61, 1 (1989), and references therein.
[12] R. Sundrum, Towards an Effective Particle String Resolution of the Cosmological Constant Problem, hep-ph/9708329.
[13] For example, F. H. Combley, (g − 2) Factors for Muon and Electron and the Consequences for QED, Rep. Prog. Phys. 42
     (1979) 1889.
[14] J. Maldacena, private communication.




                                                            5
