                                     Preprint typeset in JHEP style - HYPER VERSION




                                     Cosmic F- and D-strings
arXiv:hep-th/0312067v5 25 May 2004




                                     Edmund J. Copeland
                                        Department of Physics and Astronomy
                                        University of Sussex
                                        Brighton, BN1 9QJ, UK
                                        E-mail: e.j.copeland@sussex.ac.uk

                                     Robert C. Myers
                                        Perimeter Institute for Theoretical Physics
                                        Waterloo, Ontario N2J 2W9 Canada
                                        and
                                        Department of Physics
                                        University of Waterloo
                                        Waterloo, Ontario N2L 3G1 Canada
                                        E-mail: rmyers@perimeterinstitute.ca

                                     Joseph Polchinski
                                        Kavli Institute for Theoretical Physics
                                        Santa Barbara, CA
                                        93106-4030, USA
                                        E-mail: joep@kitp.ucsb.edu


                                     Abstract: Macroscopic fundamental and Dirichlet strings have several potential
                                     instabilities: breakage, tachyon decays, and confinement by axion domain walls. We
                                     investigate the conditions under which metastable strings can exist, and we find that
                                     such strings are present in many models. There are various possibilities, the most
                                     notable being a network of (p, q) strings. Cosmic strings give a potentially large
                                     window into string physics.

                                     Keywords: .
Contents
1. Introduction                                                                     1

2. Stability Conditions                                                             3
   2.1 Breakage                                                                     3
       2.1.1 Breakage on an M 4 -filling brane                                      3
       2.1.2 Breakage on a ‘baryon’                                                 4
   2.2 Axion domain walls                                                           6
   2.3 Two puzzles                                                                  7
       2.3.1 The first puzzle                                                       7
       2.3.2 The second puzzle                                                      8

3. The KLM
       K MT model                                                                   9
   3.1 Generalities                                                                 9
   3.2 Scenarios                                                                   11
       3.2.1 No branes in the throat                                               11
       3.2.2 Stabilizing D3-branes in the throat                                   13
       3.2.3 Standard model branes in the throat                                   14

4. Large dimension models                                                          15

5. Observational consequences                                                      16
   5.1 String properties                                                           16
       5.1.1 Tension                                                               16
       5.1.2 Superconductivity                                                     17
       5.1.3 Intercommutation                                                      17
       5.1.4 Network properties                                                    18
   5.2 Observational bounds                                                        19

6. Conclusions                                                                     21




1. Introduction
Before the ‘second superstring revolution’ there appeared to be a clear distinction
between fundamental strings and cosmic strings. Fundamental strings were believed
to have tensions µ close to the Planck scale. In perturbative heterotic string theory,



                                        –1–
for example, Gµ = αGUT /16π ∼    > 10−3 , whereas the isotropy of the cosmic microwave

background implied (even before COBE) that any string of cosmic size must have
Gµ ∼ < 10−5 [1]. Thus any cosmic strings would have had to arise in the low energy

effective field theory, as magnetic or electric flux tubes.
     In principle, fundamental strings could have been produced in the early universe
and then grown to macroscopic size with the expansion of the universe. Inflation
provides a simple explanation for the absence of cosmic fundamental strings of such
high tension. However, even aside from inflation it was noted in ref. [2] that there
are effects that would prevent the appearance of cosmic fundamental strings. Macro-
scopic type I strings break up on a stringy time scale into short open strings, and
so would never form. Macroscopic heterotic strings always appear as boundaries of
axion domain walls, whose tension would force the strings to collapse rather than
grow to cosmic scales [3]. At the time of ref. [2] no instability of long type II strings
was known, but it is now clear that NS5-brane instantons [4] (in combination with
supersymmetry breaking to lift the zero modes) will produce an axion potential and
so lead to domain walls.
     Today the situation in string theory is much richer. First, many new one-
dimensional objects are known: in addition to the fundamental F-strings, there are
D-strings, as well as higher dimensional D-, NS-, M-branes that are partially wrapped
on compact cycles so that only one noncompact dimension remains. Second, the pos-
sibility of large compact dimensions [5] and large warp factors [6] allows much lower
tensions for these strings. Third, the various string-string and string-field dualities
relate these objects to each other, and to the field-theoretic flux tubes, so that they
are actually the same object as it appears in different parts of parameter space. Thus
it is important to revisit this subject, and ask whether some of these strings may be
cosmologically interesting.
     Indeed, it has been argued by Jones, Sarangi, and Tye and by Stoica and
Tye [7] that D-brane-antibrane inflation [8] leads to the copious production of lower-
dimensional D-branes that are one-dimensional in the noncompact directions. This
is a special case of the production of strings in hybrid inflation [9]. Refs. [7] also
make the important observation that zero-dimensional defects (monopoles) and two-
dimensional defects (domain walls) are not produced; either of these would have led
to severe difficulties.
     It is necessary then to investigate the stability of possible cosmic strings against
the processes noted above. A naive extrapolation of the results of ref. [2] would
suggest that all BPS strings are confined by domain walls, and that all non-BPS
strings are unstable to breakage or tachyon decay. We will find that the situation is
more interesting, and that stable strings exist in certain classes of models but not in
others.
     In §2 we investigate this subject, and identify conditions under which long strings
can be at least metastable. Our focus is on type I/II theories, though the same



                                         –2–
principles will hold in heterotic and M theory compactifications. In §3 we apply our
conditions in the string theory inflation model of Kachru, Kallosh, Linde, Maldacena,
McAllister, and Trivedi (K  KLM MT) [10], which is based on the stabilization of all
moduli in the warped IIB framework of ref. [11]. We find that the nature of the
cosmic strings in this model depends on precisely how the Standard Model fields
and the moduli stabilization are introduced. We identify three possibilities: (a) no
strings; (b) D1-branes only (or fundamental strings only); (c) (p, q) strings — bound
states of p fundamental strings and q D-strings for relatively prime (p, q) — with
an upper bound on p. In §4 we briefly discuss large compact dimension models
without large warp factors, and find a similar range of possibilities. In §5 we discuss
the observational signatures of these cosmic strings. Although the various bounds
currently are all in the area of Gµ ∼  < 10−6 , there are future observations that will

reach many orders of magnitude further in Gµ. With (p, q) strings there are more
complicated string networks than when only one type of string is present. This may
enhance the signatures for these strings, and possibly place strong constraints on
models of these types.
     While we were completing this work we learned of papers on related subjects by
Dvali, Kallosh and Van Proeyen [12] and by Dvali and Vilenkin [13].


2. Stability Conditions

2.1 Breakage

2.1.1 Breakage on an M 4 -filling brane
The prototype example of string breakage is the type I string. On a long type I
string there is a constant rate per unit length for the string to break by formation of
a pair of endpoints [14]. By this process the string will rapidly convert to ordinary




  Figure 1: A long open string converts to short open strings on a stringy time scale.


quanta as in figure 1. The modern interpretation is that these endpoints are attached
to a spacetime-filling D9-brane. Similarly, the fundamental type II string (F-string)
can end on any D-brane, and so in any type II model with Dp-branes that fill the
noncompact M 4 dimensions there will be an amplitude for the string to break. Of
course, for p < 9 the D-brane does not fill the compact dimensions, and there is the
possibility that the breaking is suppressed due to transverse separation between the
string and the D-brane. This will allow metastable strings to exist in some models.




                                         –3–
                                              By S-duality from F1/D3, a D-string can
                                          end on a D3-brane [15, 16] and so will be un-
                                          stable in compactifications with D3-branes. A
                                          D-string can also end on a D5-brane, but ac-
                                          tually this does not represent an instability.
                                          When an F- or D-string ends on a D3-brane,
                                          the endpoints are electric or magnetic sources
                                          on the brane. The endpoint pair that is pro-
                                          duced when a string breaks are still connected
Figure 2: When a string ends on a by flux lines in the brane — one can think
brane, flux lines in the brane still con- of the string as dissolving into the brane and
nect the endpoints.                       becoming flux. For a D-string oriented in the
                                          1-direction, the flux is one unit of integrated
F23 , which can lower its energy toward zero by spreading in the 23-plane as in fig-
ure 2. Similarly an F-string dissolving in any D-brane becomes one unit of F01 which
can again spread. For a D-string dissolving in a D5-brane however, there is one unit
of F ∧ F in the four transverse directions, and the energy of this flux is not lowered
by spreading out — this is the scale invariance of the instanton action. In other
words, there is still a nonzero energy per unit length, which is not surprising given
that the parallel D1/D5 system already saturates the BPS bound.1 So from the four-
dimensional point of view the string does not break, and we might say that while a
D-string can attach to a D5-brane it cannot break on one. Similarly it actually costs
energy for a D-string to attach to a D7-brane, and so again the string cannot break.
     As another example, a string which arises from a D3-brane wrapped on a 2-
cycle can end on a D5-brane which wraps the same cycle and fills the noncompact
dimensions. Other cases can be obtained from these by S- and T -duality.
     In summary, stability requires that there be no M 4 -filling branes on which the
string can end, or that the decay be suppressed by transverse separation. We will
also encounter a related instability, the tachyonic decay of an unstable D-brane. This
is similar to breakage in that the D-brane turns into ordinary quanta on a stringy
time scale by decays everywhere along its length. An unstable D-brane in superstring
theory is constructed from a D-D pair (for a review see ref. [17]), and the tachyon
is an open string stretching between them. As with breakage, this decay can also be
suppressed by transverse separation, in this case of the D and the D.

2.1.2 Breakage on a ‘baryon’
The U(1) gauge field on the M 4 -filling brane plays an essential role in allowing the
strings to break. Strings couple to forms, for example
                                Z             Z
                                    B(2) ,        C(2)                           (2.1)
                                   F1              D1
  1
    The exact scale invariance will be broken as a consequence of supersymmetry breaking, but
there will still be a positive minimum to the string tension.




                                           –4–
for an F-string or D-string respectively, where the integrals run over the string world-
volumes.2 For a world-volume without boundary, these actions are invariant under
the form gauge transformations

                               δB(2) = dλ(1) ,     δC(2) = dχ(1) ,                           (2.2)

but when the string breaks there is a surface term in the transformation. The point
is that the form field also couples to the U(1) flux, and one sees from figure 2 that
this provides the necessary continuity. The relevant terms in the brane action are
                                  1
                             Z
                          ′
                        S =         |G(2) + B(2) |2 + G(2) ∧ C(2) .             (2.3)
                               D3 2

Here G(2) = dA(1) is the gauge field strength on the brane, and we have included
its Chern-Simons couplings to the forms. We take the example of the D3-brane,
and normalizations are simplified for clarity. The variation of S ′ under the form
transformations is
                           Z
                      ′
                   δS = −       λ(1) d∗(G(2) + B(2) ) + χ(1) dG(2) .          (2.4)
                                   D3

The F1-brane endpoint is an electric source for G(2) + B(2) , and the D-brane endpoint
is a magnetic source for G(2) , each giving a delta function in one of the terms in the
variation (2.4). Thus the variation of the actions (2.1) and (2.3) cancel when a string
breaks on a brane. The apparent asymmetry between the forms B(2) and C(2) in the
action (2.3) can be reversed by an electric-magnetic duality transformation on the
brane.
     Type II theories also have U(1) gauge fields arising from the bulk RR fields, and
these can play the same role. Consider the IIB theory, for example. The four-form
potential with one index along M 4 and three in the compact directions gives rise to
a four-dimensional gauge field for each three-cycle K3
                                           Z
                                    C[1] =     C(4) .                             (2.5)
                                                 K3


The five-form field strength includes a Chern-Simons term F̃(5) = dC(4) + B(2) ∧ F(3) .
One is generally interested in compactifications in which some of the background
three-form fluxes are nonvanishing. If, for example,
                                   Z
                                        F(3) = M ,                              (2.6)
                                          K3
   2
    Our notation is that C(q) , B(2) , and A(1) are the R-R, NS-NS, and brane gauge potentials, and
F(q+1) , H(3) , and G(2) the corresponding field strengths. A tilde on a field strength denotes the
inclusion of Chern-Simons terms. A four-dimensional form obtained by integrating a higher-rank
form over a compact submanifold is denoted by square brackets, e.g. C[q] .




                                               –5–
then the effective two-dimensional field strength is
                                  Z
                          F̃[2] =    F̃(5) = dC[1] + MB(2) .                        (2.7)
                                     K3

Comparing with the first term in the action (2.3), we see that we have the necessary
coupling to allow the F1-brane to break; the role of the integer M will be seen below.
     To complete the picture we need the mechanism by which the string breaks.
Consider a D3-brane wrapped on the same cycle K3 . This is a localized particle in
four dimensions, which we refer to loosely as a baryon, because this is the role it plays
in gauge/string duality [18]. The gauge field equation on this brane’s world-volume
is d ∗ G(2) = F(3) , again following from the action (2.3), and this is inconsistent with
the flux (2.6) unless M F1-branes end on the baryon. We conclude that precisely if
M = 1 the F1-brane can break by pair production of baryons. If M ≥ 2 then instead
the baryon is a vertex at which M F-strings meet.
     More generally, if       Z                Z
                                  F(3) = M ,            H(3) = M ′                  (2.8)
                             K3                    K3

then the baryon is a vertex at which M F1-branes and M ′ D1-branes end.

2.2 Axion domain walls
Any BPS p-brane (that is, the infinite flat brane is a BPS state) must couple to a
(p + 1)-form field C(p+1) (we are using the notation for an R-R brane, but the same
applies to NS-NS and M theory branes). This gives the repulsive force that offsets
the gravitational and dilatonic attraction between a pair of parallel branes. Let the
brane be wrapped on a (p − 1)-cycle Kp−1, thus leaving a string in the noncompact
directions. In four dimensions there will be a two-form potential
                                        Z
                                 C[2] =      C(p+1) ,                           (2.9)
                                            Kp−1

which couples to the world-volume of the string. In the four-dimensional theory this
is dual to an axion field φ,

                             dC[2] = ∗4 dφ + source terms .                       (2.10)

The string is an electric source for C[2] and so a magnetic, topological, source for φ.
That is, the axion field (appropriately normalized) changes by 2π in going around
the string:                         I
                                          dx · ∂φ = 2π                            (2.11)
                                      C
on any contour C encircling the string.
    Now consider a Euclidean (6 −p)-brane instanton, which couples magnetically to
C(p+1) , wrapping a (7 − p)-cycle K7−p that intersects Kp−1 once. A magnetic source



                                            –6–
for C(p+1) is an electric source for φ, and so the instanton amplitude is proportional
to eiφ . Since all supersymmetries are ultimately broken, the fermion zero modes in
the instanton amplitude are lifted, and this produces a periodic potential for φ. From
eq. (2.11) it follows that φ cannot sit in the minimum of this potential everywhere
as we encircle the string — there is a kink where it changes by 2π and passes over
the maximum of the potential. Since the kink in φ intersects any contour C that
circles the string, it defines a domain wall ending on the string. Unless the domain
wall tension is exceedingly small this will cause the strings to rapidly disappear [3].

2.3 Two puzzles
2.3.1 The first puzzle
A string cannot both break and bound a domain wall, because the boundary of a
boundary is zero. What happens if both instabilities appear to be present? Consider
the case of a D1-brane which can end on a D3-brane and which also couples to a
massless four-dimensional field C(2) . The effective four-dimensional action is
                       1
                         Z
                             |dC(2) |2 + |G(2) |2 + G(2) ∧ C(2) .               (2.12)
                       2
We are writing explicitly only the terms that govern the local dynamics, not the
source terms. For a higher dimensional wrapped D-brane one just replaces C(2) by
C[2] , and for an F-string by B(2) (after a D3 world-volume electric/magnetic duality).
The effective four-dimensional field equation for the massless field C(2) is
                                        d∗4 dC(2) = G(2) ,                                   (2.13)
which implies that the axion field must be defined
                                    dC(2) = ∗4 (dφ + A(1) ) .                                (2.14)
It follows that φ transforms nonlinearly under gauge transformations of the brane
gauge field A(1) ,
                             δA(1) = dλ , δφ = −λ ,                         (2.15)
and so the U(1) on the brane is Higgsed. There is no domain wall because the axion
is removed by the Higgs mechanism.3
     Let us look in more detail at the external field of a D-string running in the
1-direction, again in the effective four-dimensional picture. The nonzero field com-
ponents are C01 and G23 . The field equation for A(1) ,
                                       d(∗G(2) + C(2) ) = 0                                  (2.16)
   3                           iφ
    The instanton amplitude e would seem to violate gauge invariance, but this is balanced by
the production of charged strings. Consider for example a D1 string which can end on a D3-brane
and whose axion couples to a Euclidean D5 instanton. The instanton and D3-brane intersect in a
spacetime point, and so the string creation process is essentially the same as for a D0-brane passing
through a D8-brane [19].




                                               –7–
implies that C01 − G23 is constant in the transverse directions, and so vanishes. The
field equation (2.13) with source term from the D-string then implies that

                                2
                               ∂⊥ C01 = C01 + δ 2 (x⊥ ) .                      (2.17)

It follows that the R-R field of the string falls exponentially at infinity (the mass
is 1 because the constants have been dropped). The R–R field of the D-string is
screened, so there is no obstruction to the D-string breaking. The D-string dissolves
in the D3-brane to become a tube of G23 flux; the total flux in this tube is equal and
opposite to the screening flux, and so the G23 field dissolves into ordinary quanta.


2.3.2 The second puzzle

We have concluded that there is no stable D-string. However, there is a spontaneously
broken U(1) gauge symmetry (2.15), and so one might have expected a topologically
stable string associated with this broken symmetry [20]. Such a string would involve
degrees of freedom beyond those that we are considering, namely the ‘radial’ Higgs
field associated with the angular part φ, and so a higher energy scale; whether such
strings exist depends on the topology of this higher-energy field space.
     Unlike D-strings, such ‘φ-strings’ would not generically be produced in brane-
antibrane inflation. Ref. [7] shows that the production of strings can be understood
by applying the Kibble argument [21] to the vacuum manifold for the brane-antibrane
tachyon, as in K-theory [17,22]. Add in a D3-D3 pair, such as would be present during
inflation. If we first ignore the Higgsing by φ, the vacuum manifold is

                                 U(2) × U(1)
                                             = S3 .                            (2.18)
                                 U(1) × U(1)

The breaking is the same as the Weinberg-Salam model, SU(2) × U(1) → U(1). The
vacuum manifold is simply connected, so there is no stable D-string, reflecting the
fact that it can break on the surviving D3-brane.
     Now include the the nonlinear Higgsing (2.15). This breaks one of the denomi-
nator U(1)’s. However, the important point is that this U(1) is broken even before
the brane annihilation, by the same nonlinear mechanism: one of the numerator
U(1)’s is broken as well. Thus the vacuum manifold for D3-D3 annihilation is still
U(2)/U(1) = S 3 and so the Kibble mechanism does not lead to strings. Any strings
associated with this already-broken symmetry will have been diluted away during in-
flation, and the nonlinear Higgs field will be ordered over long distances. Of course,
if the number of e-foldings is sufficiently small, or if additional phase transitions
take place after inflation, then there may be interesting strings beyond those that we
consider.



                                         –8–
3. The K LM
          MT model

3.1 Generalities
We now apply the above analysis to the K  KLM MT model [10]. This is presently the
most well-developed model of inflation in string theory, being based on a framework
in which all moduli are stabilized [11]. Although many open issues remain, some
of which will be encountered below, this provides an excellent test case for cosmic
strings.
     The KKLM MT model is based on IIB string theory on a Calabi-Yau manifold.
This is orientifolded by a Z2 symmetry that has isolated fixed points, which become




                                                                      image throat
              D3     D3                      O3
                                                     Z2

                                       Calabi-Yau


Figure 3: Schematic picture of the K LM  MT geometry: a warped Calabi-Yau manifold with
throats, identified under a Z2 orientifold.

O3-planes.4 The spacetime metric is warped,

                              ds2 = e2A(x⊥ ) ηµν dxµ dxν + ds2⊥ .                          (3.1)

The inflaton is the separation between a D3-brane and an anti-D3-brane, whose
annihilation leads to reheating. The annihilation occurs in a region (throat) of large
gravitational redshift, min{eA(x⊥ ) } = eA0 ≪ 1, where eA(x⊥ ) is normalized to be O(1)
in the bulk of the Calabi-Yau. Note that in figure 3 the covering manifold has two
throats which are identified under the Z2 rather than a single throat identified with
itself; this is equivalent to the statement that there is no O3-plane in the throat.
     The redshift in the throat plays a key role: both the inflationary scale and the
scale of string tension, as measured by a ten-dimensional inertial observer, are set by
string physics and are close to the four-dimensional Planck scale. The corresponding
energy scales as measured by a four-dimensional physicist are then suppressed by a
factor of eA0 .
   4
    We focus on this special case of the more general F theory construction, but as we note below
the results in the latter case are much the same.




                                             –9–
     As discussed in ref. [7], one expects copious production only for objects that
are one-dimensional in the noncompact dimensions and lie entirely within the re-
gion of reheating. The obvious candidates are then the F1-brane (fundamental IIB
string) and D1-brane, localized in the throat. There is also another possibility, which
however can be quickly disposed of. In the K     KLMMT model, the throat is a Klebanov-
Strassler geometry [23], whose cross section is topologically S 2 × S 3 . A D3-brane
wrapped on the S 2 also gives a string in four dimensions. However, the S 2 is topo-
logically trivial, it collapses to a point at the end of the throat [23], and so this string
can break rapidly.
     The D1-branes can be regarded as topological defects in the tachyon field that
describes D3-D3 annihilation [17, 22], and so these will be produced by the Kibble
mechanism [21]. The F1-branes do not have a classical description in these same
variables, but in an S-dual description they are topological defects and so must
be produced in the same way. Of course, only one of the S-dual descriptions can
be quantitatively valid, and if the string coupling is of order one then neither is.
However, the Kibble argument depends only on causality and so it is probably valid
for both kinds of string in all regimes (it has also been argued in ref. [24] that
fundamental strings will be created). All strings created at the end of inflation are
at the bottom of the inflationary throat, and they remain there because they are in
a deep potential well: their effective four-dimensional tension µ depends on the warp
factor at their location and their ten-dimensional tension µ̄ as

                                        µ = e2A(x⊥ ) µ̄ .                             (3.2)

    Given both F1-branes and D1-branes, there will also be (p, q) strings for relatively
prime integers p and q. These were found in ref. [25] using the SL(2, Z) duality of
the IIB superstring theory, and are now interpreted [26, 27] as bound states of p
F1-branes and q D1-branes. Their tension in the ten-dimensional theory is

                                      1 p
                           µ̄p,q =        (p − Cq)2 + e−2Φ q 2 ,                      (3.3)
                                     2πα′

where C is the Ramond-Ramond scalar (normalized to periodicity 1) and Φ is the
dilaton (eΦ = gs ), both evaluated at the location of the string. In the K
                                                                         KLM MT model
the values of these fields are fixed in terms of discrete three-form fluxes.
     It remains to discuss the stability of these strings. From the previous section,
it is essential to know what branes remain in the theory after inflation, upon which
the (p, q) strings might break. In the K  KLM
                                            MT model there must be such branes for
two reasons: (a) there must be the branes on which the Standard Model fields live,
and (b) the moduli stabilization in this model involves one or more anti-D3-branes
located in a throat (these could possibly be the same as the Standard Model branes).



                                            – 10 –
3.2 Scenarios
As we will explain, the only branes that are relevant for the stability of the cosmic
strings are those that are located in, or intersect, the inflationary throat. We thus
consider the various possibilities.

3.2.1 No branes in the throat
Here we consider the case that the Standard Model and stabilizing branes are located
outside the inflationary throat. Let us first ask whether the (p, q) strings are BPS.
In fact they are not. The easiest way to see this is to consider the special case of the
T 6 /Z2 orientifold, which is T -dual to the type-I theory. The D1-branes become type
I D7-branes, which are non-BPS [22]. The type I orientation reversal turns a IIB
D7-brane into a D7-brane, so the type I D7-brane is actually a bound state of a IIB
D7-D7 pair. The F1-branes become type I fundamental strings, which are again non-
BPS. Another way to understand this is through the orientifold projection, under
which the forms Bµν and Cµν that couple to the F1- and D1-branes are odd [28].
Thus the zero modes of these fields are removed, and do not appear in the massless
spectrum.5
     The orientifold projection in the K  KLMMT model turns a D1-brane into an anti-
D1-brane, which is to say it reverses the orientation. The four-dimensional D-string is
thus in this construction a D1-D1 bound state, a potentially unstable configuration.
We have noted above that the D1 is confined to the tip of the inflationary potential.
The key point is then that the image D1 is in the image throat. The length of
each throat is somewhat greater than unity in string units, so the D1-D1 strings are
stretched and nontachyonic.
     Even without a tachyon it is possible for the D1-string to fluctuate into the other
well and annihilate with the D1. In order for the D-string to be an interesting cosmic
string the decay rate must be suppressed from its natural string scale, of order α′−1
per unit string length and time, to a rate of order the cosmic scale H 2 or less, a
suppression of roughly 1050 in time scale and so 10100 in rate per unit length. In fact
the suppression is much greater than this, due to the warping of the compact space.
The decay proceeds through the appearance of a hole in the Euclidean world-sheet,
in which the D1 and D1 have annihilated. At the edge of this hole the D1-brane
crosses over the to the image throat and annihilates with the D1. The rate is given
by the usual Schwinger expression for this instanton,

                                    e−B ,   B = πσ 2 /ρ .                                (3.4)

Here ρ is the action per unit area, i.e. the tension e2A0 /2πα′ gs . The parameter σ is
the action per unit length for the boundary of the hole. Since the D1-brane must
   5
   This will also be true in the more general F theory constructions. The zero modes of Bµν and
Cµν are inconsistent with the nontrivial SL(2, Z) holonomy of the 7-branes.




                                            – 11 –
pass through the unwarped bulk of the Calabi-Yau, this is of order R/2πα′gs where
R is the distance between the throat and its image. The dominant factor in B is
from the warping,
                               B ∼ e−2A0 ∼ 108 ,                             (3.5)
where the numerical value is taken from ref. [10] and will be discussed further in
§5. The warping suppresses the decay by the impressive factor e−B , even though the
D1 and its image are only a few string units apart!6 The decay of the F-string and
all the other (p, q) strings are similarly stabilized, because they involve world-sheets
that stretch from one throat to its image, through the unwarped region.
     We can now see why the branes outside the throat are irrelevant. In order for
a string to break on one of these, it must fluctuate out of the throat, which again
costs the suppression (3.5).
     Finally, let us consider decay via baryon pair production. The only relevant
baryons are the D3-branes that wrap the S 3 in the Klebanov-Strassler throat. All
other three-cycles pass through the bulk of the Calabi-Yau, and so the masses of the
corresponding baryon are at the string scale, unsuppressed by the warp factor. For
these the pair production rate is then suppressed by the same factor (3.5).
     The S 3 in the throat carries M units of F(3) [23, 28]. It follows that if M = 1
the F-strings are unstable to baryon production. More generally, a baryon allows a
(p, q) string to decay to a (p − M, q) string, and so the stable strings have |p| ≤ M/2.
     In the KKLM MT model there is a lower bound on M. During inflation there is at
least one D3 in the inflationary throat. It is shown in ref. [29] that this is classically
unstable unless
                                         M∼ > 12 .                                   (3.6)
Thus the baryon-mediated decay will not destabilize the (p, q) strings with small p,
and there is still a rich spectrum.
     The numerical value of the tunnelling rate is again given by eq. (3.4), where now
σ is the baryon mass
                                                             1
                            σ = T D3 VS 3 ,    T D3 =                     ,                (3.7)
                                                        (2π)3 α′2 g   s

and
                                     ρ = µ̄p,q − µ̄p−M,q .                                 (3.8)
Obtaining the volume of the S 3 from eq. (65) of ref. [30], one obtains for (p, q) →
(p − M, q) with p > M/2 a decay rate of order

                                                        qM 2
                                e−B ,    B ∼ 0.2 ×            ;                            (3.9)
                                                       2p − M
   6
     The radial metric in the throat goes as dr2 /r2 , so the length is only logarithmic in eA0 ∼
rmin /rmax .




                                              – 12 –
we have taken gs ≪ 1 to simplify the expression. There is no suppression from the
warp factor because the decay takes place entirely in the throat, and the decay will
be rapid on a cosmological time scale (B < 200) for a wide range of parameters. For
example, if q = 1 and 2p − M = O(M), the decay is rapid for M < 103 . The baryon
is a ‘bead’ at which a (p, q) string and a (p − M, q) string join, and it will accelerate
rapidly in the direction of the higher-tension string.
     Incidentally, a process similar to the pair production of baryons is the decay of
the inflationary D3 by an NS5-brane instanton wrapped on the S 3 [29, 31]. This is
negligible on cosmological time scales unless M is very close to the bound (3.6).
     In summary, in this case we obtain (p, q) strings for relatively prime p, q with
|p| ≤ M/2.

3.2.2 Stabilizing D3-branes in the throat
Now suppose that the stabilizing D3-brane(s) are in the same throat in which inflation
occurs. In other words, inflation is driven by N D3-branes and ∆ + N D3-branes
for some ∆ > 0, so that after annihilation ∆ D3-branes remain. In this case the
F-strings and D-strings can both break, as can all the (p, q) strings, and there are no
cosmic strings. In terms of K theory, the tachyon vacuum manifold is

                                     U(N) × U(∆ + N)
                                                     .                            (3.10)
                                       U(N) × U(∆)

This contains a U(1) and supports D-string vortices only if the number ∆ of residual
D3-branes vanishes.
     The various scenarios that we are exploring must satisfy a number of nontrivial
constraints, including stability of the weak scale, stability of the moduli during in-
flation, and sufficient reheating [32]. We will not attempt to discuss these in detail
here, but it is worth noting that the present scenario has a serious, probably fatal,
problem with reheating. The point is that there is a U(1) gauge field on the stabiliz-
ing D3. This is the only massless degree of freedom in the inflationary throat, and
so the only one that couples directly to the inflationary fields. Then almost all of the
energy at reheating goes into these U(1) gauge bosons rather than into the Standard
Model fields.
     Of course, many of the specific features of the KKLM MT model may be absent in
more general constructions. The role of the D3-branes is to break supersymmetry,
raising the supersymmetric AdS vacuum to a state of approximately zero cosmolog-
ical constant [11]. It seems likely that there are other dynamical mechanisms that
would accomplish the same thing,7 and that there need not be an associated U(1)
field in general. This eliminates the immediate problem with reheating (though this
is still a nontrivial issue to explore). However, the alternate stabilizing mechanism
  7
      We thank S. Kachru and E. Silverstein for comments on this point.




                                             – 13 –
no longer mediates breaking of (p, q) strings, as this also requires a U(1) gauge field
as in figure 2. Thus we would obtain the same strings as in the no-brane case.

3.2.3 Standard model branes in the throat
Now let us consider the Standard Model branes. In the K        KLMMT model it is natu-
ral to introduce D3-branes and/or D3-branes, as well as D7-branes in the F theory
constructions. Ref. [33] gives constructions of the Standard Model in terms of local
configurations with these ingredients. These local constructions can then be incor-
porated into the K  KLMMT model. In order to reduce the supersymmetry of the low
energy theory from N = 4 to N = 1 or N = 0 it is necessary that the D3-branes
(or D3-branes) be fixed at an appropriate singularity, for example an orbifold fixed
point. The D7-branes are needed for anomaly cancellation, and they must also pass
through this singularity. In some cases (certain non-Abelian orbifolds) the D7-branes
are not needed [33, 34].
     Consider first the case that the 3-branes and the singularity are outside the
inflationary throat but at least one of the D7-branes passes through the bottom of
the throat. By the general discussion of breakage, the F1-branes will now be able
to break but the D1-branes will not, and so the only cosmic string is the D-string.
However, there is a caveat. The breaking of the F-strings requires the U(1) gauge
field on the D7-brane. Since the D7-branes are extended, their dynamics depends on
the physics not only in the throat but in the full Calabi-Yau. If the U(1) is confined
in some way, then again a larger set of (p, q) strings will be stable. This may be
the case, because in F theory compactifications there is not in general a U(1) gauge
field locally associated to each 7-brane [35]; some of the U(1)’s are frozen out by the
global dynamics.
     Now consider the case that the Standard Model 3-branes and the associated
singularity are located in the inflationary throat. For this discussion it will not matter
whether these are D3-branes or D3-branes, although of course this will strongly affect
the dynamics and the breaking of supersymmetry. With 3-branes in the throat, all
the (p, q) strings are unstable to breakage.
     The presence of the singularity gives rise to a new possibility. We focus on the
example of the C3 /Z3 orbifold singularity for simplicity. Hidden in the singularity
are a collapsed two-cycle and a collapsed four-cycle. A D3-brane wrapped on the two-
cycle and a D5-brane wrapped on the four-cycle are both effectively one-dimensional,
not only as seen in four dimensions but as seen in ten — they are fully located in
the throat. Certain bound states of the D1 and wrapped D3 and D5 are referred to
as fractional strings, from their perturbative orbifold description [36, 37].
     If we consider the Z3 orbifold of the IIB theory before the Z2 orientifold, and
ignore for now the D3-branes, then the fractional strings are BPS states. They couple
to the global C(2) field, and also to two additional two-forms which are obtained
from C(4) integrated over the collapsed two-cycle and from C(6) integrated over the



                                         – 14 –
collapsed four-cycle. In the perturbative picture the latter two two-forms are twisted
sector states. The orientifold projection removes C(2) but not the other two — there
are independent collapsed cycles and corresponding two-form fields in each image
throat, and one linear combination of each survives. Thus after the orientifold these
fractional strings are axionic.
     To complete the story we must consider the M 4 -filling branes. As with the D1-
branes, there are fractional D3-branes, which arise from D5-branes wrapped on the
collapsed two-cycle and from D7-branes wrapped on the collapsed four-cycle. The
respective strings can break on these. In the models of ref. [33] there are M 4 -filling
branes of all three types — there are three U(1)’s in particular — so that all the
strings are unstable to breakage.
     We conclude that with the Standard Model 3-branes in the inflationary throat
there are no interesting cosmic strings.


4. Large dimension models
In the KKLMMT model the string scale is lowered by a large warp factor. It can also
be lowered in the context of large compact dimensions without such a large warping;
this was the context for the analysis in ref. [7]. Although in these models there are
not yet examples with all moduli stabilized, we can still investigate the stability of
potential cosmic strings.
     Consider first the prototype example, the T 6 /Z2 orientifold, where the Z2 reflects
k coordinates. This model is equivalent to the type I string under T -duality on k
axes. It has Dp-branes and Op-planes for p = 9 − k. There are potential cosmic
strings from wrapped Dq-branes, where p − q must be even (p − q odd gives non-
BPS strings that immediately decay [17, 22]). The key property that characterizes
the strings is the number ν of ND or DN directions, in which the Dp-branes are
extended and the Dq-branes are not or vice versa. This number must be even (like
p − q) and is at least two, from the noncompact dimensions transverse to the string.
If ν = 2 mod 4, the strings are non-BPS, like the D1-branes of the K     KLMMT model.
However, the strings here are free to fluctuate over the whole compact space and so
can rapidly find their Z2 images and decay. If ν = 4 mod 4, the strings are BPS
and so axionic; only the ν = 2 strings can break so these axions are not Higgsed.
Because this theory has N = 4 supersymmetry, instantons cannot generate an axion
potential, and the BPS strings are stable global strings.
     Reducing the supersymmetry to a realistic level will have several effects. First,
it produces an axion potential so the BPS strings are now confined by domain walls.
The instanton action is of order of the volume in string units of the cycle K7−p on
which it wraps. If this is of order 102 or more, the domain wall tension could be
small enough not to confine the strings. One would expect that the supersymmetry
breaking would also produce a potential for the positions of the Dq-branes in the



                                         – 15 –
compact space, so that these will be trapped in local minima. If a Dq-brane and its
Dq image are in different minima then their annihilation may be suppressed as in
the K
    KLM MT model. There the suppression was due to a deep warp factor, and here it
would be due to a large distance l between the Dq and Dq. Estimating the tunneling
action (3.4) for the example of D1-branes, we have σ ∼ l/gs α′ and ρ ∼ 1/gs α′ , and
so
                                    B ∼ l2 /gs α′ .                             (4.1)
This can be quite large for large l. Similarly there can be long-lived F-strings, and
so (p, q) strings. There could be an even richer spectrum of strings in the large
dimension models from wrapping on different cycles [7]. The Standard Model branes
may allow some of these to break, but others — those wrapped on different cycles
from the Standard Model branes, for example — will remain stable.


5. Observational consequences
5.1 String properties
The evolution of string networks, and their signatures, depend on certain physical
properties of the strings: their tensions, their interaction with nongravitational fields,
and their intercommutation properties.

5.1.1 Tension
For any given geometry the form of the brane-antibrane potential is known, and so
one obtains a relation between the observed magnitude of density fluctuations δH
and the parameters of the model. For the models of ref. [7], which are based on
unwarped compactifications with the moduli fixed by hand, the authors find a range
                                        < Gµ < 10−6 ,
                                  10−11 ∼    ∼                                      (5.1)

with a narrower range around 10−7 for their favored models based on branes at
small angles. For the K
                      KLM
                        MT model, combining equations (3.7), (3.9), and (C.12) of
ref. [10] gives
                            G2 e4A0          3
                                            δH
                                       =         5/2
                                                     ,                      (5.2)
                           (2πα′ )2 gs   32πC13 Ne
where C1 is a model-dependent constant of order unity and Ne is the number of
e-foldings for the observed fluctuations. Inserting the numerical values [10] δH =
1.9 × 10−5 , C1 = 0.39, and Ne = 60 gives 4 × 10−20 for the right-hand side. The
left-hand side is simply the product of the values of Gµ for the F-string and the
D-string, assuming for simplicity that the RR scalar C vanishes. Thus,
                       p                                µD   1
                           GµF GµD ∼ 2 × 10−10 ,           =    .                   (5.3)
                                                        µF   gs



                                         – 16 –
The value of gs is likely in the range 0.1 to 1 (gs > 1 can be converted to gs < 1 by
S-duality), so Gµ for both strings is in the range 10−10 to 10−9 .
    Note that these string tensions are all deduced assuming that the cosmological
perturbations arise from the fluctuations of the inflaton field. More general mecha-
nisms would allow a wider range of scales.

5.1.2 Superconductivity
Superconducting strings carry massless charged degrees of freedom [38]. Of the
strings that we have discussed, the (p, q) strings are not superconducting. They are
at a potential minimum distant from any other branes in the compact space, and so
their only massless fluctuations are their transverse fluctuations and the fermionic
partners of these.
     The D-strings, obtained when a D7-brane passes through the throat, will be
superconducting with respect to the D7-brane gauge field if the D7-brane and the
D1-brane are precisely coincident. In general there is no reason that this should be
the case because the positions are determined by different dynamics — that of the
D1-brane by the local warp factor, and that of the D7-brane by global considerations.
Further, the virtual 1-7 strings contribute a short-distance repulsive term. Thus these
are unlikely to be superconducting. If the D1-D7 separation is small there will be a
strong coupling of the string to the Standard Model fields; such a coupling is absent
for the (p, q) strings.

5.1.3 Intercommutation
Consider first the case that there is only one kind of string. When two strings
cross they may pass through one another or intercommute (reconnect) as in figure 4.
For gauge theory strings the reconnection probability is essentially unity [39]. For




Figure 4: When two strings of the same type cross they can intercommute (reconnect).

fundamental bosonic strings the probability was obtained in ref. [40]. The same
result holds for the superstring [42]: the probability is of order
                                                 Vmin
                                    P ∼ 0.5gs2                                     (5.4)
                                                  V
for a typical collision. Here V is the six-volume within which the strings are confined,
and Vmin = (4π 2 α′ )3 is the minimum volume for toroidal compactification. For gs > 1



                                        – 17 –
(and so also for D-strings) P should saturate, possibly with a slow rise, around
P ∼ Vmin/V .
     For the large dimension models, the factor Vmin /V will give a large suppression
if the strings are free to fluctuate over the compact space [7]. This may be the case
in highly supersymmetric models, but as we have noted in the previous section we
expect that in realistic models any strings will be localized by a potential and so the
effective V will be smaller than the total volume of the compact space. For a string
of tension µ̄ whose transverse fluctuations feel an external potential characterized
by mass-squared m2 (the bars indicate that we are working in the ten–dimensional
metric), the quantum fluctuations of the string give

                                       1      µ̄   1/3 µ̄F  µ̄
                         h(δX)2 i ∼        ln 2 ∼ Vmin 2 ln 2 .                                (5.5)
                                      4π µ̄ m         8π µ̄ m

We have used two-dimensional free field theory with a UV cutoff at µ̄. From this
it appears that the fluctuations around the potential minimum will not give a large
enhancement of V /Vmin; in particular, the effective V grows only logarithmically
with m−1 . Hence the probability (5.4) for strings to intercommute is not unusually
suppressed. Thermal fluctuations at T ≫ m would give some suppression of P .
     When strings of two different types cross they cannot intercommute in the same
way. Rather they can produce a pair of trilinear vertices connected by a segment of
string (figure 5). For example, the crossing of a (p, q) string and a (p′ , q ′ ) string can

                                                                              1                   2
  1                                      1                           2
                                                     3                               4
                                                                         or


   2                                     2                       1
                                                                              2               1

                       Figure 5: Crossing of strings of different types.

produce a (p + p′ , q + q ′ ) string or a (p − p′ , q − q ′ ) string.8 Only for (p′ , q ′ ) = ±(p, q)
is the usual intercommutation possible.
     A more complete treatment of this subject is in preparation [42].

5.1.4 Network properties
After their formation at the end of inflation, string networks decay by the com-
bined processes of intercommutation, which breaks longer strings into smaller loops,
   8
   There has been extensive study of two-dimensional supersymmetric networks formed in this
way; see for example ref. [41].




                                              – 18 –
and gravitational radiation. For gauge theory strings there is also the decay pro-
cess due to the fields themselves, and there is a debate as to which of the decay
processes dominate (gravitational versus Higgs) [43, 44]. Assuming gravitational ra-
diation dominates, then if the decay proceeds at the maximum rate consistent with
causality, the distribution of strings will scale with the horizon volume. This scal-
ing behavior leads to an energy density that goes as t−2 , so that w = 1/3 in the
radiation-dominated era and w = 0 in the matter-dominated era. That is, in each
era the energy density in strings is a fixed fraction of the total energy density. Sim-
ulations indicate that networks composed of a single kind of string do scale, with
ρstring /ρrad ∼ 400Gµ in the radiation dominated era and ρstring /ρmat ∼ 60Gµ in the
matter dominated era. These values are for recombination probability P = 1 and
increase as P decreases [45].
      When there are several kinds of string, with trilinear vertices, then there is the
possibility that the network evolves to a three-dimensional structure which freezes in
a local minimum of the potential energy and then just grows with the expansion of
the universe. In this case the energy density would evolve as a(t)−2 , or w = −1/3.
Whether the network freezes or scales is a complicated dynamical problem. Such
networks arise in field theory when a symmetry group G breaks to a discrete subgroup
K. When K is non-Abelian, intercommutation cannot occur, rather the network
evolves as in figure 5. Simulations of K = Z3 (with string vertices provided by
monopoles) [46] and K = S3 [47, 48] indicate that these systems scale rather than
freeze, but with some enhanced density of strings. Simulations of K = S8 [47]
show an energy density that grows relative to the scaling solution and appears to
indicate freezing behavior. This is consistent with the fact that the larger group
allows networks of greater topological complexity, but it could also be a reflection
that the simulations in [47] have not yet managed to reach the scaling regime. It is
worth investigating this issue further.
      To determine whether networks of (p, q) strings scale or freeze will ultimately re-
quire simulations. We conjecture that they scale, in that their topological complexity
appears to be roughly that of the S3 networks. If gs is close to one, only the four
lowlying strings with |p|, |q| ≤ 1 are likely to be heavily populated. For any crossing
between two lowlying strings, one of the two processes in figure 5 will again involve
only lowlying strings, and for most angles of crossing this process will be energetically
favored. Another argument for scaling behavior is to consider the limit gs ≪ 1, where
the D-strings are much heavier than the F-strings. The D-strings should then evolve
largely independently of the F-strings, and so scale like a single-string network; after
the D-strings decay to the scaling distribution on a given length scale, the F-strings
in turn evolve like a single-string network.

5.2 Observational bounds
If a string network freezes into a w = −1/3 state, it quickly comes to dominate



                                         – 19 –
the energy density of the universe unless the initial energy scale is much lower than
those considered above: it must be of order the weak scale or less. Thus if (p, q)
string networks freeze, models with (p, q) strings are excluded with the parameters
considered here. Again, our conjecture is that they do not freeze.
     Assuming a scaling distribution of cosmic strings, the current upper bound on
Gµ comes from the power spectrum of the CMB, based on numerical evolution of
the Nambu-Goto equations: Gµ ∼      < 0.7 × 10−6 [49] (see also ref. [50]). The tensions

given in section 5.1.1 for the various models are below this bound. On the other hand
numerical evolution of the underlying Abelian-Higgs field theory has led Vincent et
al to argue that the bound is closer to Gµ ≈ 10−8 [43] (however see also [44]).
     Superconducting strings may act as sources for vortons [51], loops of cosmic
string with charge and current stabilized by the angular momentum of the charge
carriers. In this case they would be subject to bounds on their allowed tension, with
10−28 ∼ < Gµ < 10−10 being claimed to be a cosmologically unacceptable range of
                ∼
values [52]. If the energy scale associated with superconducting strings were close
to the electroweak scale, then the vortons could become serious candidates for cold
dark matter. In the context of the K   KLMMT model, this would correspond to having
inflation in the throat occurring at or around the electroweak scale.
     Cosmic strings produce large quantities of gravitational waves, because they are
relativistic and inhomogeneous. Pulsar timing measurements then place an upper
bound on Gµ which is roughly comparable to that from the CMB, depending on
uncertainties from network properties [53].
     Remarkably, future measurements of non-gaussian emission of gravitational waves
from cusps on strings will be sensitive to cosmic strings with values of Gµ seven or-
ders of magnitude below the current bound, covering the entire range of tensions
discussed in section 5.1.1. According to ref. [54], even LIGO 1 may be sensitive to a
range around Gµ ∼ 10−10 , while LIGO 2 will reach down to Gµ ∼ 10−11 and LISA
to Gµ ∼ 10−13 . In addition [54], pulsar timing measurements may reach a sensitivity
of Gµ ∼ 10−11 . Thus, gravitational waves provide a potentially large window into
string physics, if we have a model in which strings are produced after inflation and
are metastable.
     If the string couples strongly to Standard Model fields then instead of primarily
producing gravitational radiation the string network may decay through the produc-
tion of high energy cosmic rays, photons and neutrinos from string cusps [55]. These
authors have calculated the predicted flux of high energy gamma rays, neutrinos and
cosmic ray antiprotons and protons as a function of the scale of symmetry breaking at
which the strings are produced, and argued that in order to reproduce the (possibly)
observed distribution of particles above the GZK cut-off, they require Gµ ≤ 10−9 .
Given the values we expect in the K     KLMMT model this remains in the interesting
regime for cosmic strings arising out of string theory. Note however refs. [56], which
argue that the cosmic radiation from cusps is suppressed.



                                        – 20 –
6. Conclusions
We have found that both fundamental and Dirichlet strings might be observed as
cosmic strings. The issue is model-dependent — it depends on having brane inflation
to produce the strings, and on having a scenario in which the strings are stable.
Nevertheless, this is a potentially large and rather direct window onto string theory.
     Of course, if cosmic strings are discovered, the problem will be to distinguish
fundamental objects from gauge theory solitons. Indeed, this is not a completely
sharp question, because these are dual descriptions of the same objects. If one can
infer that the strings have intercommutation probabilities less than unity, this is a
strong indication that they are weakly coupled F-strings. Discovery of a (p, q) spec-
trum of strings would be a promising signal for F- and D-strings. Note however that
these throats have a dual gauge description [23] and therefore such strings can also
be obtained in gauge theory; the spectrum is actually a signal of an SL(2, Z) duality
and so might arise in other ways as well. If cosmic strings are found through the
gravitational radiation from cusps, determining their tensions and intercommutation
properties will require a spectrum of many events as well as precise simulations of
the evolution of string networks.


Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Stephon Alexander, David Berenstein, Robert Branden-
berger, Alessandra Buonanno, Thibault Damour, Gia Dvali, Jaume Gomis, Chris
Herzog, Nick Jones, Shamit Kachru, Renata Kallosh, Tom Kibble, Andrei Linde,
Eva Silverstein, Scott Thomas, Sandip Trivedi, Mark Trodden, Henry Tye, and Alex
Vilenkin for useful discussions. We also thank Jose Blanco-Pillado, Greg Moore, and
Ken Olum for comments on the manuscript. EJC and RCM would like to thank the
organizers of the String Cosmology program at the Kavli Institute for Theoretical
Physics for their invitation to participate in such a stimulating meeting. The work
of RCM at the Perimeter Institute is supported by funds from NSERC of Canada.
The work of JP is supported by National Science Foundation grants PHY99-07949
and PHY00-98395.




                                       – 21 –
References
[1] M. B. Hindmarsh and T. W. Kibble, “Cosmic strings,” Rept. Prog. Phys. 58, 477
    (1995) [arXiv:hep-ph/9411342];
   A. Vilenkin and E.P.S. Shellard, Cosmic strings and other topological defects,
   Cambridge Univ. Press (Cambridge 1994).

[2] E. Witten, “Cosmic superstrings,” Phys. Lett. B 153, 243 (1985).

[3] A. Vilenkin and A. E. Everett, “Cosmic strings and domain walls in models with
    Goldstone and pseudogoldstone bosons,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 48, 1867 (1982).

[4] K. Becker, M. Becker and A. Strominger, Nucl. Phys. B 456, 130 (1995)
    [arXiv:hep-th/9507158].

[5] N. Arkani-Hamed, S. Dimopoulos and G. R. Dvali, “The hierarchy problem and new
    dimensions at a millimeter,” Phys. Lett. B 429, 263 (1998) [arXiv:hep-ph/9803315];
   I. Antoniadis, N. Arkani-Hamed, S. Dimopoulos and G. R. Dvali, “New dimensions
   at a millimeter to a Fermi and superstrings at a TeV,” Phys. Lett. B 436, 257 (1998)
   [arXiv:hep-ph/9804398];
   N. Arkani-Hamed, S. Dimopoulos and G. R. Dvali, “Phenomenology, astrophysics
   and cosmology of theories with sub-millimeter dimensions and TeV scale quantum
   gravity,” Phys. Rev. D 59, 086004 (1999) [arXiv:hep-ph/9807344].

[6] L. Randall and R. Sundrum, “A large mass hierarchy from a small extra dimension,”
    Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 3370 (1999) [arXiv:hep-ph/9905221];
   L. Randall and R. Sundrum, “An alternative to compactification,” Phys. Rev. Lett.
   83 (1999) 4690 [arXiv:hep-th/9906064].

[7] N. Jones, H. Stoica and S. H. Tye, “Brane interaction as the origin of inflation,”
    JHEP 0207, 051 (2002) [arXiv:hep-th/0203163];
   S. Sarangi and S. H. Tye, “Cosmic string production towards the end of brane
   inflation,” Phys. Lett. B 536, 185 (2002) [arXiv:hep-th/0204074];
   N. T. Jones, H. Stoica and S. H. Tye, “The production, spectrum and evolution of
   cosmic strings in brane inflation,” Phys. Lett. B 563, 6 (2003)
   [arXiv:hep-th/0303269].

[8] G. R. Dvali and S. H. H. Tye, “Brane inflation,” Phys. Lett. B 450, 72 (1999)
    [arXiv:hep-ph/9812483];
   S. H. S. Alexander, “Inflation from D - anti-D brane annihilation,” Phys. Rev. D 65,
   023507 (2002) [arXiv:hep-th/0105032];
   C. P. Burgess, M. Majumdar, D. Nolte, F. Quevedo, G. Rajesh and R. J. Zhang,
   “The inflationary brane-antibrane universe,” JHEP 0107, 047 (2001)
   [arXiv:hep-th/0105204];
   G. R. Dvali, Q. Shafi and S. Solganik, “D-brane inflation,” arXiv:hep-th/0105203.




                                         – 22 –
 [9] J. Yokoyama, “Inflation can save cosmic strings,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 63, 712 (1989);
    L. Kofman, A. D. Linde and A. A. Starobinsky, “Non-thermal phase transitions after
    inflation,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 76, 1011 (1996) [arXiv:hep-th/9510119];
    I. Tkachev, S. Khlebnikov, L. Kofman and A. D. Linde, “Cosmic strings from
    preheating,” Phys. Lett. B 440, 262 (1998) [arXiv:hep-ph/9805209];
    E.J. Copeland, S. Pascoli and A. Rajantie, “Dynamics of tachyonic preheating
    after hybrid inflation” Phys. Rev. D 65, 103517 (2002) [arXiv:hep-ph/0202031].

[10] S. Kachru, R. Kallosh, A. Linde, J. Maldacena, L. McAllister and S. P. Trivedi,
     “Towards inflation in string theory,” JCAP 0310, 013 (2003) [arXiv:hep-th/0308055].

[11] S. Kachru, R. Kallosh, A. Linde and S. P. Trivedi, “De Sitter vacua in string
     theory,” Phys. Rev. D 68, 046005 (2003) [arXiv:hep-th/0301240].

[12] G. Dvali, R. Kallosh and A. Van Proeyen, “D-term strings,” arXiv:hep-th/0312005.

[13] G. Dvali and A. Vilenkin, “Formation and evolution of cosmic D-strings,”
     arXiv:hep-th/0312007.

[14] J. Dai and J. Polchinski, “The decay of macroscopic fundamental strings,” Phys.
     Lett. B 220, 387 (1989);
    D. Mitchell, N. Turok, R. Wilkinson and P. Jetzer, “The decay of highly excited
    open strings,” Nucl. Phys. B 315, 1 (1989) [Erratum-ibid. B 322, 628 (1989)].

[15] A. Strominger, “Open p-branes,” Phys. Lett. B 383, 44 (1996)
     [arXiv:hep-th/9512059].

[16] J. H. Schwarz, “Lectures on superstring and M theory dualities,” Nucl. Phys. Proc.
     Suppl. 55B, 1 (1997) [arXiv:hep-th/9607201].

[17] A. Sen, “Non-BPS states and branes in string theory,” arXiv:hep-th/9904207.

[18] E. Witten, “Baryons and branes in anti de Sitter space,” JHEP 9807 (1998) 006
     [arXiv:hep-th/9805112];
    D. Berenstein, C. P. Herzog and I. R. Klebanov, “Baryon spectra and AdS/CFT
    correspondence,” JHEP 0206 (2002) 047 [arXiv:hep-th/0202150].

[19] A. Hanany and E. Witten, “Type IIB superstrings, BPS monopoles, and
     three-dimensional gauge dynamics,” Nucl. Phys. B 492, 152 (1997)
     [arXiv:hep-th/9611230];
    C. P. Bachas, M. R. Douglas and M. B. Green, “Anomalous creation of branes,”
    JHEP 9707, 002 (1997) [arXiv:hep-th/9705074];
    U. Danielsson, G. Ferretti and I. R. Klebanov, “Creation of fundamental strings by
    crossing D-branes,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, 1984 (1997) [arXiv:hep-th/9705084];
    O. Bergman, M. R. Gaberdiel and G. Lifschytz, “Branes, orientifolds and the
    creation of elementary strings,” Nucl. Phys. B 509, 194 (1998)
    [arXiv:hep-th/9705130].




                                         – 23 –
[20] L. Leblond and S. H. H. Tye, “Stability of D1-strings inside a D3-brane,” JHEP
     0403, 055 (2004) [arXiv:hep-th/0402072];
    G. Dvali, private communication.

[21] T.W.B. Kibble, “Topology of cosmic domains and strings” J. Phys A 9, 1387 (1976)

[22] E. Witten, “D-branes and K-theory,” JHEP 9812, 019 (1998)
     [arXiv:hep-th/9810188];
    P. Horava, “Type IIA D-branes, K-theory, and matrix theory,” Adv. Theor. Math.
    Phys. 2, 1373 (1999) [arXiv:hep-th/9812135].

[23] I. R. Klebanov and M. J. Strassler, “Supergravity and a confining gauge theory:
     Duality cascades and χSB-resolution of naked singularities,” JHEP 0008, 052 (2000)
     [arXiv:hep-th/0007191].

[24] G. Dvali and A. Vilenkin, “Solitonic D-branes and brane annihilation,” Phys. Rev. D
     67, 046002 (2003) [arXiv:hep-th/0209217].

[25] J. A. Harvey and A. Strominger, “The heterotic string is a soliton,” Nucl. Phys. B
     449, 535 (1995) [Erratum-ibid. B 458, 456 (1996)] [arXiv:hep-th/9504047];
    J. H. Schwarz, “An SL(2,Z) multiplet of type IIB superstrings,” Phys. Lett. B 360,
    13 (1995) [Erratum-ibid. B 364, 252 (1995)] [arXiv:hep-th/9508143].

[26] J. Polchinski, “Dirichlet-branes and Ramond-Ramond charges,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 75,
     4724 (1995) [arXiv:hep-th/9510017].

[27] E. Witten, “Bound states of strings and p-branes,” Nucl. Phys. B 460, 335 (1996)
     [arXiv:hep-th/9510135].

[28] S. B. Giddings, S. Kachru and J. Polchinski, “Hierarchies from fluxes in string
     compactifications,” Phys. Rev. D 66, 106006 (2002) [arXiv:hep-th/0105097].

[29] S. Kachru, J. Pearson and H. Verlinde, “Brane/flux annihilation and the string dual
     of a non-supersymmetric field theory,” JHEP 0206, 021 (2002)
     [arXiv:hep-th/0112197].

[30] C. P. Herzog, I. R. Klebanov and P. Ouyang, “Remarks on the warped deformed
     conifold,” arXiv:hep-th/0108101.

[31] A. R. Frey, M. Lippert and B. Williams, “The fall of stringy de Sitter,” Phys. Rev.
     D 68 (2003) 046008 [arXiv:hep-th/0305018].

[32] J. Polchinski and S. Trivedi, work in progress.

[33] G. Aldazabal, L. E. Ibanez, F. Quevedo and A. M. Uranga, “D-branes at
     singularities: A bottom-up approach to the string embedding of the standard
     model,” JHEP 0008, 002 (2000) [arXiv:hep-th/0005067];




                                          – 24 –
    J. F. G. Cascales, M. P. Garcia del Moral, F. Quevedo and A. Uranga. “Realistic
    D-brane models on warped throats: fluxes, hierarchies and moduli stabilization,”
    arXiv:hep-th/0312051.

[34] D. Berenstein, V. Jejjala and R. G. Leigh, “The standard model on a D-brane,”
     Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 071602 (2002) [arXiv:hep-ph/0105042].

[35] C. Vafa, “Evidence for F-Theory,” Nucl. Phys. B 469, 403 (1996)
     [arXiv:hep-th/9602022].

[36] M. R. Douglas and G. W. Moore, “D-branes, Quivers, and ALE Instantons,”
     arXiv:hep-th/9603167;
    J. Polchinski, “Tensors from K3 orientifolds,” Phys. Rev. D 55, 6423 (1997)
    [arXiv:hep-th/9606165];
    C. V. Johnson and R. C. Myers, Phys. Rev. D 55, 6382 (1997)
    [arXiv:hep-th/9610140];
    D. E. Diaconescu, M. R. Douglas and J. Gomis, “Fractional branes and wrapped
    branes,” JHEP 9802, 013 (1998) [arXiv:hep-th/9712230].

[37] D. E. Diaconescu and J. Gomis, “Fractional branes and boundary states in orbifold
     theories,” JHEP 0010, 001 (2000) [arXiv:hep-th/9906242].

[38] E. Witten, “Superconducting strings,” Nucl. Phys. B 249, 557 (1985).

[39] R.A. Matzner, “Interaction of U (1) cosmic strings: numerical intercommutation,”
     Comput. Phys. 2, 51 (1989).

[40] J. Polchinski, “Collision of macroscopic fundamental strings,” Phys. Lett. B 209,
     252 (1988).

[41] A. Sen, “String network,” JHEP 9803, 005 (1998) [arXiv:hep-th/9711130].

[42] M. G. Jackson, N. T. Jones, and J. Polchinski, “Collisions of cosmic F- and
     D-strings,” in preparation.

[43] G. Vincent, N. D. Antunes and M. Hindmarsh, “Numerical simulations of string
     networks in the Abelian-Higgs model,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 2277 (1998)
     [arXiv:hep-ph/9708427].

[44] J. N. Moore, E. P. S. Shellard and C. J. A. Martins, “On the evolution of
     Abelian-Higgs string networks,” Phys. Rev. D 65, 023503 (2002)
     [arXiv:hep-ph/0107171], and references therein.

[45] T. W. B. Kibble, “Evolution of a system of cosmic strings,” Nucl. Phys. B 252, 227
     (1985) [Erratum-ibid. B 261, 750 (1985)].

[46] T. Vachaspati and A. Vilenkin, “Evolution of cosmic networks,” Phys. Rev. D 35,
     1131 (1987).




                                         – 25 –
[47] D. Spergel and U. L. Pen, Astrophys. J. 491, L67 (1997) [arXiv:astro-ph/9611198].

[48] P. McGraw, “Evolution of a non-Abelian cosmic string network,” Phys. Rev. D 57,
     3317 (1998) [arXiv:astro-ph/9706182].

[49] M. Landriau and E. P. S. Shellard, “Large angle CMB fluctuations from cosmic
     strings with a comsological constant,” [arXiv:astro-ph/0302166].

[50] L. Pogosian, S. H. H. Tye, I. Wasserman and M. Wyman, “Observational constraints
     on cosmic string production during brane inflation,” Phys. Rev. D 68, 023506 (2003)
     [arXiv:hep-th/0304188].

[51] R. L. Davis and E. P. S. Shellard, “Cosmic Vortons,” Nucl. Phys. B 323, 209 (1989).

[52] C. J. A. Martins and E. P. S. Shellard, “Limits on cosmic chiral vortons,” Phys.
     Lett. B 445, 43 (1998) [arXiv:hep-ph/9806480].

[53] R.R. Caldwell, R.A. Battye and E.P.S. Shellard, “Relic gravitational waves from
     cosmic strings: updated constraints and opportunities for detection,” Phys. Rev. D
     54, 7146 (1996) [arXiv:astro-ph/9607130]

[54] T. Damour and A. Vilenkin, “Gravitational wave bursts from cusps and kinks on
     cosmic strings,” Phys. Rev. D 64, 064008 (2001) [arXiv:gr-qc/0104026].

[55] P. Bhattacharjee, “Cosmic strings and ultrahigh-energy cosmic rays,” Phys. Rev. D
     40, 3968 (1989);
    J. H. MacGibbon and R. H. Brandenberger, “High-energy neutrino flux from
    ordinary cosmic ctrings,” Nucl. Phys. B 331, 153 (1990);
    U. F. Wichoski, J. H. MacGibbon and R. H. Brandenberger, “High energy neutrinos,
    photons and cosmic rays from non-scaling cosmic strings,” Phys. Rev. D 65, 063005
    (2002) [arXiv:hep-ph/9805419].

[56] J. J. Blanco-Pillado and K. D. Olum, “The form of cosmic string cusps,” Phys. Rev.
     D 59, 063508 (1999) [arXiv:gr-qc/9810005];
    K. D. Olum and J. J. Blanco-Pillado, “Field theory simulation of Abelian-Higgs
    cosmic string cusps,” Phys. Rev. D 60, 023503 (1999) [arXiv:gr-qc/9812040].




                                         – 26 –
