arXiv:hep-th/9611050v2 23 Apr 1997

TASI LECTURES ON D-BRANES
JOSEPH POLCHINSKI
Institute for Theoretical Physics
University of California, Santa Barbara, CA 93106-4030
This is an introduction to the properties of D-branes, topological defects in string
theory on which string endpoints can live. D-branes provide a simple description
of various nonperturbative objects required by string duality, and give new insight
into the quantum mechanics of black holes and the nature of spacetime at the
shortest distances. The first two thirds of these lectures closely follow the earlier
ITP lectures hep-th/9602052, written with S. Chaudhuri and C. Johnson. The
final third includes more extensive applications to string duality.

D-branes are extended objects, topological defects in a sense, defined by
the property that strings can end on them. One way to see that these objects
must be present in string theory is by studying the R → 0 limit of open
string theory, where the different behaviors of open and closed strings lead to
a seeming paradox.1 From the study of this limit one can argue that the usual
Type I, Type IIA and Type IIB string theories are different states in a single
theory, which also contains states with arbitrary configurations of D-branes.
Moreover this argument is purely perturbative, in that it does not require any
strong-coupling continuation or use of the BPS property.
However, this subject remained obscure until the advent of string duality.
It was then observed that D-branes have precisely the correct properties to fill
out duality multiplets,2 whose other members are fundamental string states and
ordinary field-theoretic solitons. Further, they are much simpler than ordinary
solitons, and their bound states and other properties can be understood more
explicitly. Even before the role of D-branes was realized, the circumstantial
evidence for string duality was extremely strong. D-branes have extended this
by providing a much more complete and detailed dynamical picture. Beyond
the simple verification of weak/strong duality, D-branes have given surprising
and still developing insight into the quantum mechanics of black holes and into
the nature of spacetime at the shortest distance scales.
The first three lectures develop the basic properties of D-branes. The
approach follows ref. 1, coming upon D-branes by way of T -duality. Lecture 1
is a review of open and unoriented bosonic strings, lecture 2 develops the
effect of T -duality in these theories, and lecture 3 extends these results to the
superstring. The final two lectures develop various more advanced ideas as
well as applications to string duality.
These lectures are an expanded and updated version of an earlier set of
1

notes from lectures given at the ITP, which were written up with Shyamoli
Chaudhuri and Clifford Johnson.3 The first two thirds of the present lectures
closely follow those notes. The final third gives a more detailed treatment of
the application to string duality. New or extended subjects include D-brane
actions, D-brane bound states, the connection to M theory and U-duality, and
D-branes as instantons, as probes, and as black holes. Obviously, given constraints of space and time, the discussion of each of these subjects is somewhat
abbreviated.
1

Lecture 1: Open and Unoriented Bosonic Strings

The weakly coupled E8 × E8 heterotic string on a Calabi-Yau manifold is
strikingly similar to the grand unified Standard Model. Thus, the focus after
the 1984 revolution was on this closed oriented string theory. We must therefore
begin with an introduction to the special features of open and unoriented
strings.
1.1

Open Strings

To parameterize the open string world sheet, let the ‘spatial’ coordinate run
0 ≤ σ 1 ≤ π. In conformal gauge, the action is
Z
1
d2 σ ∂a X µ ∂a Xµ .
(1)
4πα′ M
Varying X µ and integrating by parts,
Z
Z
1
1
2
µ 2
δS = −
d σ δX ∂ Xµ +
dσ δX µ ∂n Xµ
2πα′ M
2πα′ ∂M

(2)

where ∂n is the derivative normal to the boundary. The bulk term in the variation (2) gives Laplace’s equation (or the wave equation, if we have Minkowski
signature on the world-sheet.) At the boundary, the only Poincaré invariant
condition is the Neumann condition
∂n X µ = 0.

(3)

The Dirichlet condition X µ = constant is also consistent with the equation
of motion and we might study it directly. However, we have chosen to follow the
approach of ref. 1, beginning with the Neumann condition and finding that the
Dirichlet condition is forced on us by T -duality. This is a good pedagogic route,
as the various properties of D-branes make their appearance in a natural way. It
also shows that D-branes are necessarily part of the spectrum of string theory,
2

as one can start from the ordinary open string vacuum and by a continuous
change of parameters (R → 0) get to a state containing D-branes.
We should mention some early papers4 in which Dirichlet conditions were
investigated as a potentially interesting variation of string theory in their own
right. The association of the Dirichlet condition with an actual hyperplane
in spacetime came later, in the context of compactification of open string
theory.5,6 It was then observed that the hyperplane was a dynamical object1 ,
hence ‘D-brane,’ and that it could be produced via T-duality.1,7,8
The papers in the previous paragraph kept the Neumann condition for the
time coordinate (and usually for some spatial coordinates) so that they defined
an object, the D-brane. Fully Dirichlet conditions define the D-instanton.
These boundary conditions were originally interpreted in terms of an off-shell
probe of string theory.9 It was then proposed to modify string theory by the
inclusion of a gas of such objects, changing the short distance structure.10 It was
later argued11 that such D-instantons were a necessary part of string theory
and carried the combinatoric weight e−O(1/g) associated with large stringy
nonperturbative effects.12 It was also observed that the D-instanton breaks
half the supersymmetries.13
The general solution to Laplace’s equation with Neumann boundary conditions is
r
α′ X αµm −m
µ
µ
′ µ
X (z, z̄) = x − iα p ln(z z̄) + i
(z
+ z̄ −m ),
(4)
2
m
m6=0

where xµ and pµ are the position and momentum of the center of mass. As
is conventional in conformal field theory, this has been written in terms of
2
1
the coordinate z = eσ −iσ , so that time runs radially. The usual canonical
quantization gives the commutators
[xµ , pν ]

= iη µν ,

[αµm , ανn ]

= mδm+n η µν .

(5)

The mass shell condition is
1
M 2 = −pµ pµ = ′
α

∞
X

m=1

!

mNm − 1 .

(6)

Here Nm is the number of excited oscillators in the mth mode, and the −1 is
the zero point energy of the physical bosons. Let us remind the reader of the
mnemonic for zero point energies. A boson with periodic boundary conditions
1
, and with antiperiodic boundary conditions it is
has zero point energy − 24
3

3

2

a)

b)

4

3

2

4

1

1

Figure 1: a) Scattering of open strings. b) Conformally transformed world-sheet.
1
48 .

For fermions, there is an extra minus sign. For the bosonic string in 26
dimensions, there are 24 transverse (physical) degrees of freedom, for a total
24
of − 24
= −1.
For example, the two lightest particle states and their vertex operators are
tachyon
photon

|ki,

M 2 = −1/α′ ,

αµ−1 |ki,

M 2 = 0,

V = exp(ik · X)

V µ = ∂t X µ exp(ik · X).

(7)

Here ∂t is the derivative tangent to the string’s world sheet boundary. The
open string vertex operators are integrated only over the world-sheet boundary
as is evident in figure 1b.
1.2

Chan-Paton Factors

It is consistent with spacetime Poincaré invariance and world-sheet conformal
invariance to add non-dynamical degrees of freedom to the ends of the string.
Their Hamiltonian vanishes so these Chan-Paton degrees of freedom have no
dynamics—an end of the string prepared in one of these states will remain in
4

j

i

Figure 2: Open string with Chan-Paton degrees of freedom.

that state. So in addition to the usual Fock space label for the state of the
string, each end is in a state i or j where the labels run from 1 to N . The
n × n matrices λaij form a basis into which to decompose a string wavefunction
|k; ai =

N
X

i,j=1

|k, ijiλaij .

(8)

These wavefunctions are the Chan-Paton factors.14 Each vertex operator carries
such a factor. The tree diagram for four oriented strings s shown in figure 1.
Since the Chan-Paton degrees of freedom are non-dynamical, the right end
of string 1 must be in the same state as the left end of string 2, and so on.
Summing over all basis states then gives a trace of the product of Chan-Paton
factors,
λ1ij λ2jk λ3kl λ4li = Tr(λ1 λ2 λ3 λ4 ).
(9)
Such a trace appears in each open string amplitude. All such amplitudes are
invariant under a the U (N ) symmetry a
λi → U λi U −1 ,

(10)

under which the endpoints transform as N and N̄ . The massless vector vertex
operator V aµ = λaij ∂t X µ exp(ik · X) transforms as the adjoint under the U (N )
symmetry, so (as is generally the case in string theory) this global symmetry
of the world-sheet theory is elevated to a gauge symmetry in spacetime.
The massless bosonic fields are the graviton Gµν , dilaton φ, antisymmetric
tensor Bµν , and vector Aµ . The closed string coupling is related to the expectation value of the dilaton field φ0 by g = eφ0 . In the low energy limit, the
massless fields satisfy equations of motion that may be obtained by varying
the action



Z
1 −2φ
1
2
µνκ
S =
d10 x
R
+
4(∇φ)
−
e
H
H
µνκ
2κ20
12

c −φ
(11)
− e TrFµν F µν + O(α′ ) .
4
a The amplitudes are actually invariant under GL(N ), but this does not leave the norms of

states invariant.

5

This action arises at tree level in string perturbation theory. The dimensionful
constant κ0 is arbitrary, though in the context of string duality there will be
a natural additive normalization for φ and so a natural value for κ0 . The
closed string kinetic terms are accompanied by g −2 from the sphere and the
open string kinetic terms by g −1 from the disk. The normalization of the open
string action will be determined later.
1.3

Unoriented Strings

Let us begin with the open string sector. World sheet parity Ω takes σ 1 →
2
1
π − σ 1 and acts on z = eσ −iσ as z ↔ −z̄. In terms of the mode expansion,
X µ (z, z̄) → X µ (−z̄, −z) takes
xµ
pµ
αµm

→ xµ
→ pµ

→ (−1)m αµm .

(12)

This is a global symmetry of the open string theory above, but we can also
consider the theory that results when it is gauged. When a discrete symmetry
is gauged, only invariant states are left in the spectrum. The familiar example
of this is the orbifold construction, in which some global world-sheet symmetry,
usually a discrete symmetry of spacetime, is gauged. The open string tachyon
is even and survives the Ω-projection, while the photon does not, as
Ω|ki = +|ki
Ωαµ−1 |ki

= −αµ−1 |ki.

(13)

We have made an assumption here about the overall sign of Ω. This sign
is fixed by the requirement that Ω be conserved in string interactions, which
is to say that it is a symmetry of the operator product expansion (OPE).
The assignment (13) matches the symmetries of the vertex operators (7); in
particular, the minus sign on the photon is from the orientation reversal on
the tangent derivative ∂t .
World-sheet parity reverses the Chan-Paton factors on the two ends of
the string, but more generally it may have some additional action on each
endpoint,
Ωλij |k, iji → λ′ij |k, iji, λ′ = M λT M −1 .
(14)
The form of the action on the Chan-Paton factor follows from the requirement
that this be a symmetry of general amplitudes such as (9).
6

Acting twice with Ω squares to the identity on the fields, leaving only the
action on the Chan-Paton degrees of freedom. States are thus invariant under
λ → M M −T λM T M −1 .

(15)

The λ must span a complete set of N × N matrices. To see this, observe
that if strings ik and jl are in the spectrum for any values of k and l, then
so is the state ij. This is because jl implies lj by CPT, and a splittingjoining interaction in the middle gives ik + lj → ij + lk. But now eq. (15)
and Schur’s lemma require M M −T to be proportional to the identity, so M
is either symmetric or antisymmetric. This gives two cases, up to choice of
basis:15
a. Symmetric: M = M T = IN

(16)

where IN is the N × N unit matrix. In this case, for the photon λij αµ−1 |ki to
be even under Ω and therefore survive the projection, the Chan-Paton factor
must be antisymmetric to cancel the transformation of the oscillator state. So
λ = −λT , giving the gauge group is SO(N ).


0
IN/2
b. Antisymmetric: M = −M T = i
.
(17)
−IN/2
0
In this case, λ = −M λT M , which defines the gauge group U Sp(N ).b
Now consider the closed string sector. For closed strings, we have the
familiar mode expansion X µ (z, z̄) = X µ (z) + X µ (z̄) with

r 
µ
′
X
α
α
m 
−αµ0 ln z +
,
X µ (z) = xµ + i
2
mz m
m6=0

r 
µ
′
X
α̃
α
m 
−α̃µ0 ln z̄ +
X µ (z̄) = x̃µ + i
.
(18)
2
mz̄ m
m6=0

The theory is invariant under a world-sheet parity symmetry σ 1 → −σ 1 . For
a closed string, the action of Ω is thus to reverse the right- and left-moving
oscillators,
Ω: αµm ↔ α̃µm .
(19)

For convenience, parity is here taken to be z → z̄, differing by a σ 1 -translation
from z → −z̄. This is a global symmetry, but again we can gauge it. We have
b In the notation where U Sp(2) ≡ SU (2). This group is also denoted Sp(N/2).

7

a)

b)

Figure 3: a) Torus formed by identifying opposite edges. b) Klein bottle formed by identification with a twist.

Ω|ki = |ki, and so the tachyon remains in the spectrum. However
Ωαµ−1 α̃ν−1 |ki = α̃µ−1 αν−1 |ki,

(20)

so only states symmetric under µ ↔ ν survive from this multiplet, i.e. the
graviton and dilaton. The antisymmetric tensor is projected out.
One can also think about the gauging of Ω in terms of world-sheet topologies. When a world-sheet symmetry is gauged, a string carried around a closed
curve on the world-sheet need only come back to itself up to a gauge transformation. Gauging world-sheet parity thus implies the inclusion of unoriented
world-sheets. Figure 3 shows an example. The oriented one-loop closed string
amplitude comes only from the torus, while insertion of the projector 12 Tr(1+Ω)
into a closed string one-loop amplitude will give the amplitudes on the torus
plus Klein bottle. Similarly, the unoriented one-loop open string amplitude
comes from the annulus and Möbius strip. We will discuss these amplitudes
in more detail later.
The lowest order unoriented amplitude is the projective plane, which is
a disk with opposite points identified. The projective plane can be thought
of as a sphere with a crosscap inserted, where a crosscap is a circular hole
with opposite points identified. A sphere with two crosscaps is the same as a
Klein bottle; this representation will be useful and will be explained further in
section 2.6.
Gauging world-sheet parity is similar to the usual orbifold construction,
gauging an internal symmetry of the world-sheet theory. One difference is that
there is no direct analog of the twisted states because the Klein bottle does
not have the modular transformation τ → −1/τ . On the torus, the projection
operator implies the insertion of twists in the timelike (vertical) direction of
figure 3a; rotating the figure by 90◦ , these become twists in the spacelike
8

Figure 4: Projective plane formed by identifying opposite points on the disk as shown. This
can also be regarded as a sphere with a crosscap inserted.

direction, implying twisted states in the spectrum. But if the Klein bottle of
figure 3b is rotated by 90◦ , the directions of time on the two opposite edges
do not match and there is no interpretation in terms of intermediate states in
this channel.
Various authors have identified open strings as the twisted states of the Ω
projection.16,6 There are some definite senses in which these are parallel, but
the analogy is not exact and we find it dangerous in that it might lead one to
be less than general.
2

Lecture 2: T -Duality

2.1

Self-Duality of Closed Strings

For closed strings, let us first study the zero modes. The mode expansion (18)
is
r
r
α′ µ
α′ µ
µ 2
µ
µ
µ
(α0 + α̃0 )σ +
(α − α̃µ0 )σ 1 + oscillators. (21)
X (z, z̄) = x + x̃ − i
2
2 0
Noether’s theorem gives the spacetime momentum of a string as
1
(αµ0 + α̃µ0 ).
pµ = √
2α′

(22)

Underpσ 1 → σ 1 + 2π, the oscillator term are periodic and X µ (z, z̄) changes
by 2π (α′ /2)(αµ0 − α̃µ0 ). For a non-compact spatial direction µ, X µ (z, z̄) is
single-valued, and so
r
α′ µ
µ
µ
p .
(23)
α0 = α̃0 =
2
9

Since vertex operators must leave the space (23) invariant, they may contain
only the combination xµ + x̃µ .
For a compact direction of radius R, say µ = 25, X 25 has period 2πR. The
momentum p25 can take the values n/R. Also, under σ 1 ∼ σ 1 + 2π, X 25 (z, z̄)
can change by 2πwR. Thus
r
2n α′
25
25
α0 + α̃0 =
R
2
r
2
25
wR
(24)
α25
=
0 − α̃0
α′
and so
α25
0
α̃25
0

=



wR
n
+ ′
R
α

=



n
wR
− ′
R
α

r
r

α′
2
α′
.
2

(25)

Turning to the mass spectrum, we have
M 2 = −pµ pµ

=
=

4
2 25 2
(α ) + ′ (N − 1)
α′ 0
α
2 25 2
4
(α̃ ) + ′ (N̄ − 1).
α′ 0
α

(26)

Here µ runs only over the non-compact dimensions, N is the total level of the
left-moving excitations, and N̄ the total level of the right-moving excitations.
As R → ∞, all states with w 6= 0 become infinitely massive, while the w = 0
states with all values of n go over to a continuum. As R → 0, all states
with n 6= 0 become infinitely massive. In field theory this is all that would
happen—the surviving fields would be independent of the compact coordinate,
so the effective dimension is reduced. In closed string theory things work quite
differently: the n = 0 states with all w values form a continuum as R → 0,
because it is very cheap to wind around the small circle. In the R → 0 limit,
the compactified dimension reappears! This is the first and still most striking
indication that strings see spacetime geometry differently from the way we
are used to. Indeed, many other examples of ‘stringy geometry’ or ‘quantum
geometry’ are closely related to this.17
The mass spectra of the theories at radius R and α′ /R are identical when
the winding and Kaluza-Klein modes are interchanged n ↔ w,18 which takes
25
α25
0 → α0 ,

25
α̃25
0 → −α̃0 .

10

(27)

The interactions are identical as well.19 Write the radius-R theory in terms of
X ′25 (z, z̄) = X 25 (z) − X 25 (z̄) .

(28)

The energy-momentum tensor and OPE and therefore all of the correlation
functions are invariant under this rewriting. The only change, evident from
eq. (27), is that the zero mode spectrum in the new variable is that of the
α′ /R theory. In other words, these theories are physically identical; T -duality,
relating the R and α′ /R theories, is an exact symmetry of perturbative closed
string theory. Note that the transformation (28) can be regarded as a spacetime
parity transformation acting only on the right-moving degrees of freedom.
This duality transformation is in fact an exact symmetry of closed string
theory.20 To see why, recall from Ooguri’s lectures the appearance of an SU (2)L ×
SU (2)R extended gauge symmetry at the self-dual radius. Additional left- and
right-moving currents are present at this radius in the massless spectrum,
√
SU (2)L :
∂X 25 (z), exp(±2iX 25(z)/ α′ )
√
¯ 25 (z), exp(±2iX 25(z̄)/ α′ ) .
SU (2)R :
∂X
(29)
¯ 25 , transforms as a
The marginal operator for the change of radius, ∂X 25 ∂X
(3, 3) and so a rotation by π in one of the SU (2)’s transforms it into minus
itself. The transformation R → α′ /R is therefore a Z2 subgroup of the SU (2)×
SU (2). We may not know what non-perturbative string theory is, but it is a
fairly safe bet that it does not violate spacetime gauge symmetries explicitly,
else the theory could not be consistent.c This is a simple example of an idea
which plays a prominent role in the study of string duality: that arguments
based on consistency in the low energy field theory place strong constraints on
the non-perturbative behavior of strings.
It is important to note that T -duality acts nontrivially on the dilaton.21
By the usual dimensional reduction, the effective 25-dimensional coupling is
′
eφ R−1/2 . Duality requires this to be equal to eφ R′−1/2 , hence
′

eφ = eφ R−1 α′
2.2

1/2

.

(30)

T -Duality of Open Strings

Now consider the R → 0 limit of the open string spectrum. Open strings
cannot wind around the periodic dimension; they have no quantum number
comparable to w. So when R → 0 the states with nonzero momentum go to
infinite mass, but there is no new continuum of states. The behavior is as in
c Note that the Z

2 is already spontaneously broken, away from the self-dual radius.

11

field theory: the compactified dimension disappears, leaving a theory in D − 1
spacetime dimensions. The seeming paradox arises when one remembers that
theories with open strings always have closed strings as well, so that in the
R → 0 limit the closed strings live in D spacetime dimensions but the open
strings only in D − 1.
One can reason out what is happening as follows. The string in the interior of the open string is the same ‘stuff’ as the closed string is made of,
and so should still be vibrating in D dimensions. What distinguishes the
open string is its endpoints, and these are restricted to a D − 1 dimensional
hyperplane. Indeed, this follows from the duality transformation (28). The
Neumann condition ∂n X 25 for the original coordinate becomes ∂t X ′25 for the
dual coordinate.1−8 This is the Dirichlet condition: the X 25 coordinate of the
endpoint is fixed, so the endpoint is constrained to lie on a hyperplane.
In fact, all endpoints are constrained to lie on the same hyperplane. To
see this, integrate
Z π
Z π
X ′25 (π) − X ′25 (0) =
dσ∂σ X ′25 = i
dσ∂τ X 25
0

0

′ 25

= 2πα p

2πα′ n
=
= 2πnR′ .
R

(31)

That is, X ′25 at the two ends is equal up to an integral multiple of the periodicity of the dual dimension, corresponding to a string that winds as in figure 5.
For two different open strings, consider the connected world-sheet that results
from graviton exchange between them. One can carry out the same argument (31) on a path connecting any two endpoints, so all endpoints lie on the
same hyperplane. The ends are still free to move in the other D − 2 = 24
spatial dimensions.
2.3

T -Duality with Chan-Paton Factors and Wilson Lines

Now we study the effect of Chan-Paton factors.11 Consider the case of U (N ),
the oriented open string. In compactifying the X 25 direction, we can include
a Wilson line A25 = diag{θ1 , θ2 , . . . , θN }/2πR, generically breaking U (N ) →
U (1)N . Locally this is pure gauge,
A25 = −iΛ−1 ∂25 Λ,

Λ = diag{eiX

25

θ1 /2πR

, eiX

25

θ2 /2πR

, . . . , eiX

25

θ1 /2πR

}.
(32)
One can then gauge A25 away, but the gauge transformation is not periodic
and the fields now pick up a phase

(33)
diag e−iθ1 , e−iθ2 , . . . , e−iθN
12

Figure 5: Open strings with endpoints attached to a hyperplane. The dashed planes are
periodically identified. The strings shown have winding numbers zero and one.

under X 25 → X 25 + 2πR. What is the effect in the dual theory? Due to the
phase (33) the open string momenta now in general have fractional parts. Since
the momentum is dual to the winding number, we expect the fields in the dual
description to have fractional winding number, meaning that their endpoints
are no longer on the same hyperplane. Indeed, a string whose endpoints are in
the state |iji picks up a phase ei(θj −θi ) , so the momentum is (2πn+θj −θi )/2πR.
The calculation (31) then gives
X ′25 (π) − X ′25 (0) = (2πn + θj − θi )R′ .

(34)

In other words, up to an arbitrary additive normalization, the endpoint in state
i is at
X ′25 = θi R′ = 2πα′ A25,ii .
(35)
There are in general N hyperplanes at different positions as depicted in figure 6.

2.4

D-Brane Dynamics

Let us first note that this whole picture goes through if several coordinates
X m = {X 25 , X 24 , . . . , X p+1 } are periodic, and we rewrite the periodic di13

θ1R'

0

θ2R'

θ3R' 2πR'

Figure 6: N = 3 hyperplanes at different positions, with various strings attached.

mensions in terms of the dual coordinate. The open string endpoints are
then confined to N (p + 1)-dimensional hyperplanes. The Neumann conditions on the world sheet, ∂n X m (σ 1 , σ 2 ) = 0, have become Dirichlet conditions
∂t X ′m (σ 1 , σ 2 ) = 0 for the dual coordinates.
It is natural to expect that the hyperplane is dynamical rather than rigid.1
For one thing, this theory still has gravity, and it is difficult to see how a
perfectly rigid object could exist. Rather, we would expect that the hyperplanes can fluctuate in shape and position as dynamical objects. We can see
this by looking at the massless spectrum of the theory, interpreted in the dual
coordinates.
Taking for illustration the case where a single coordinate is dualized, consider the mass spectrum. The D − 1 dimensional mass is
M2

1
= (p25 )2 + ′ (N − 1)
α

2
[2πn + (θi − θj )]R′
1
=
+ ′ (N − 1).
′
2πα
α

(36)

Note that [2πn+(θi −θj )]R′ is the minimum length of a string winding between
14

hyperplanes i and j. Massless states arise generically only for non-winding open
strings whose end points are on the same hyperplane, as the string tension
contributes an energy to a stretched string. We have therefore the massless
states:
αµ−1 |k; iii,

αm
−1 |k; iii,

V = ∂t X µ ,
V = ∂t X 25 = ∂n X ′25 .

(37)

The first of these is a gauge field living on the hyperplane, with p + 1 components tangent to the hyperplane. The second was the gauge field in the
compact direction in the original theory. In the dual theory it becomes the
transverse position of the hyperplane. We have already seen this in eq. (35)
for a Wilson line, a constant gauge potential. More general gauge backgrounds
would correspond to curved surfaces, and the quanta of the gauge fields to
fluctuations. This is the same phenomenon as with spacetime itself. We start
with strings in a flat background and discover that a massless closed string
state corresponds to fluctuations of the geometry. Here we found first a flat
hyperplane, and then discovered that a certain open string state corresponds
to fluctuations of its shape.
Thus the hyperplane is indeed a dynamical object, a Dirichlet membrane,
or D-brane for short, or more specifically a D p-brane. In this terminology,
the original Type I theory contains N D 25-branes. A 25-brane fills space,
so the string endpoint can be anywhere: it just corresponds to an ordinary
Chan-Paton factor.
It is interesting to look at the U (N ) symmetry breaking in the dual picture.
When no D-branes coincide, there is just one massless vector each, or U (1)N in
all, the generic unbroken group. If m D-branes coincide, there are new massless
states because strings which are stretched between these branes can achieve
vanishing length. Thus, there are m2 vectors, forming the adjoint of a U (m)
gauge group.11,22 This coincident position corresponds to θ1 = θ2 = · · · = θm
for some subset of the original {θ}, so in the original theory the Wilson line
left a U (m) subgroup unbroken. At the same time, there appears a set of m2
massless scalars: the m positions are promoted to a matrix. This is curious
and hard to visualize, but has proven to play an important role in the dynamics
of D-branes.22 Note that if all N branes are coincident, we recover the U (N )
gauge symmetry.
This picture seems a bit exotic, and will become more so in the unoriented
theory. But all we have done is to rewrite the original open string
√ theory in
terms of variables which are more natural in the limit R ≪ α′ . Various
puzzling features of the small-radius limit become clear in the T -dual picture.
15

Observe that, since T -duality interchanges N and D boundary conditions,
a further T -duality in a direction tangent to a D p-brane reduces it to a (p− 1)brane, while a T -duality in a direction orthogonal turns it into a (p + 1)-brane.
The case of a nontrivial angle will come up in the next section.
2.5

The D-Brane Action

The world-brane theory consists of a U (1) vector field plus 25 − p world-brane
scalars describing the fluctuations. It is important to consider the low energy
effective action for these fields. They are in interaction with the massless closed
string fields, whose action was given in the first line of eq. (11). Introduce
coordinates ξ a , a = 0, . . . p on the brane. The fields on the brane are the
embedding X µ (ξ) and the gauge field Aa (ξ). The action is23
Z
Sp = −Tp dp+1 ξ e−φ det1/2 (Gab + Bab + 2πα′ Fab ) ,
(38)
where Gab and Bab are the pull-back of the spacetime fields to the brane.
All features of this equation can be understood from general reasoning. The
det1/2 Gab term gives the world-volume. The dilaton dependence e−φ = g −1
arises because this is an open string tree level action.
The dependence on F can be understood as follows.24,25 Consider a Dbrane which is extended in the X 1 and X 2 directions, with the other dimensions unspecified, and let there be a constant gauge field F12 . Go to the gauge
A2 = X 1 F12 . Now T -dual along the 2-direction. The open strings then satisfy Dirichlet conditions in this direction, but the relation (35) between the
potential and coordinate implies that the D-brane is tilted,
X ′2 = 2πα′ X 1 F12 .
This gives a geometric factor in the action,
Z
Z
p
p
dX 1 1 + (∂1 X ′2 )2 = dX 1 1 + (2πα′ F12 )2 .

(39)

(40)

By boosting the D-brane to be aligned with the coordinate axes and then
rotating to bring Fab to block-diagonal form, one can reduce to a product of
factors (40) giving Fab in the determinant (38). This determinant is the BornInfeld action.26 The combination Bab + 2πα′ Fab can be understood as follows.
These fields appear in the string world-sheet action as
Z
Z
1
B
+
A,
(41)
2πα′ M
∂M
16

written using differential forms. This is invariant under the vector gauge transformation δA = dλ, but the two-form gauge transformation δB = dζ gives a
surface term that is canceled by assigning a transformation δA = −ζ/2πα′
to the gauge field. Then the combination B + 2πα′ F is invariant under both
symmetries, and it is this combination that must appear in the action. Thus
the form of the action is fully determined.
In the next section we will calculate the value of the tension Tp , but it is
interesting to note that one gets a recursion relation for it from T -duality.27,28
The mass of a D p-brane wrapped around a p-torus is
Tp e−φ

p
Y

(2πRi ) .

(42)

i=1

Taking the T -dual on X p and recalling the transformation (30) of the dilaton,
we can rewrite the mass (42) in the dual variables:
p−1
p−1
Y
Y
√
−φ′
−φ′
′
Tp (2π α )e
(2πRi ) ,
(2πRi ) = Tp−1 e

or

(43)

i=1

i=1

√
Tp = Tp−1 /2π α′ .

(44)

For N D-branes the brane fields become matrices as we have seen. Nonderivative terms in the collective coordinates can be deduced by T -duality from
a constant Aa field. The leading action for the latter, from the non-Abelian
field strength, is proportional to Tr([X a , X b ] [Xa , Xb ]). The derivatives are relevant only when this vanishes. The Xa then commute and can be diagonalized
simultaneously, giving N independent D-branes. The action is therefore

Z
Sp = −Tp dp+1 ξ e−φ Tr det1/2 (Gab + Bab + 2πα′ Fab )

a
b 2
+O([X , X ] ) .
(45)
The precise form of the commutator term, including coupling to other fields
and higher powers of the commutator, can be deduced by T -duality from the
26-dimensional non-Abelian Born-Infeld action.
2.6

D-Brane Tension

It is instructive to compute the D-brane tension Tp , and for the superstring
the actual value will be significant. As noted above, it is proportional to g −1 .
17

σ2
σ1

Figure 7: Exchange of a closed string between two D-branes. Equivalently, a vacuum loop
of an open string with one end on each D-brane.

One could calculate it from the gravitational coupling to the D-brane, given by
the disk with a graviton vertex operator. However, it is much easier to obtain
the absolute normalization as follows. Consider two parallel Dirichlet p-branes
at positions X ′µ = 0 and X ′µ = Y µ . These two objects can feel each other‘s
presence by exchanging closed strings as shown in figure 7. This string graph
is an annulus, with no vertex operators. It is therefore easily calculated. The
poles from graviton and dilaton exchange then give the coupling Tp of closed
string states to the D-brane.
Parameterize the world-sheet as (σ 1 , σ 2 ) where σ 2 (periodic) runs from 0
to 2πt, and σ 1 from 0 to π. This vacuum graph has the single modulus t,
running from 0 to ∞. Time-slicing horizontally, so that σ 2 is world-sheet time,
gives a loop of open string. Time-slicing vertically instead, so that σ 1 is time,
we see a single closed string propagating in the tree channel. The world-line of
the open string boundary can be regarded as a vertex connecting the vacuum
to the single closed string, i.e., a one-point closed string vertex.29,30
Consider the limit t → 0 of the loop amplitude. This is the ultra-violet
limit for the open string channel, but unlike the torus, there is no modular
group acting to cut off the range of integration. However, because of duality,
18

this limit is correctly interpreted as an infrared limit. Time-slicing vertically
shows that the t → 0 limit is dominated by the lowest lying modes in the
closed string spectrum. In keeping with string folklore, there are no “ultraviolet
limits” of the moduli space which could give rise to high energy divergences. All
divergences in loop amplitudes come from pinching handles and are controlled
by the lightest states, or the long distance physics.
One loop vacuum amplitudes are given by the Coleman-Weinberg formula,
which can be thought of as the sum of the zero point energies of all the modes:31
Z
Z ∞
dp+1 k
dt X −2πα′ t(k2 +MI2 )
A = Vp+1
e
.
(46)
p+1
(2π)
2t
0
I

Here the sum I is over the physical spectrum of the string, equivalent to the
transverse spectrum, and the momentum k is in the p + 1 extended directions
of the D-brane world-sheet. The mass spectrum is given by
!
∞
Y ·Y
1 X i
i
2
(47)
nα α − 1 + 2 ′2
M = ′
α n=1 −n n
4π α

where Y m is the separation of the D-branes. The sums over Nni = αi−n αin are
as usual geometric, giving
Z ∞
(p+1)
′
dt
(8π 2 α′ t)− 2 e−Y ·Y t/2πα f1 (q)−24 .
(48)
A = 2Vp+1
2t
0
Here q = e−πt , the overall factor of 2 is from exchanging the two ends of the
string, and we define
f1 (q)

=

q 1/12

∞
Y

(1 − q 2n )

n=1

f2 (q)

=

∞
√ 1/12 Y
2q
(1 + q 2n )
n=1

f3 (q)
f4 (q)

=
=

∞
Y

q −1/24
q −1/24

(1 + q 2n−1 )

n=1
∞
Y

(1 − q 2n−1 ) .

(49)

n=1

We need the asymptotics as t → 0. The asymptotics as t → ∞ are manifest,
and the t → 0 asymptotics are then obtained from the modular transformations
√
f1 (e−π/s ) = s f1 (e−πs ), f3 (e−π/s ) = f3 (e−πs ), f2 (e−π/s ) = f4 (e−πs ).
(50)
19

In the present case
Z ∞


(p+1)
′
dt
A = 2Vp+1
(8π 2 α′ t)− 2 e−Y ·Y t/2πα t12 e2π/t + 24 + . . . .
2t
0

(51)

The leading divergence is from the tachyon and is an uninteresting bosonic
artifact. The massless pole, from the second term, is
A ∼
=

24
Vp+1 12 (4π 2 α′ )11−p π (p−23)/2 Γ((23 − p)/2)|Y |p−23
2
24π
Vp+1 10 (4π 2 α′ )11−p G25−p (Y 2 )
2

(52)

where Gd (Y 2 ) is the massless scalar Green’s function in d dimensions.
This can be compared with a field theory calculation, the exchange of
graviton plus dilaton between a pair of D-branes. The propagator is from the
bulk action (11) and the couplings are from the D-brane action (38). This is
a bit of effort because the graviton and dilaton mix, but in the end one finds
A∼
and so

D−2
Vp+1 Tp2 κ20 G25−p (Y 2 )
4

√
π
Tp =
(4π 2 α′ )(11−p)/2 .
16κ0

(53)

(54)

This agrees with the recursion relation (44). The actual D-brane tension includes a factor of the dilaton from the action (38),
√
π
τp =
(4π 2 α′ )(11−p)/2
(55)
16κ
where κ = κ0 eφ .
As one application, consider N 25-branes, which is the same as an ordinary (fully Neumann) N -valued Chan-Paton factor. Expanding the 25-brane
Lagrangian (38) to second order in the gauge field gives
−

T25
(2πα′ )2 e−φ TrFµν F µν ,
4

(56)

with the trace in the fundamental representation of U (N ). This gives the
precise numerical relation between the open and closed string couplings.32
The asymptotics (51) have an obvious interpretation in terms of a sum
over closed string states exchanged between the two D-branes. One can write
20

the cylinder path integral in Hilbert space formalism treating σ1 rather than
σ2 as time. It then has the form
hB|e−(L0 +L̃0 )π/t |Bi

(57)

where the boundary state |Bi is the closed string state created by the boundary
loop. We will not have time to develop this formalism but it is useful in finding
the couplings between closed and open strings.29,30
2.7

Unoriented Strings and Orientifolds.

The R → 0 limit of an unoriented theory also leads to new objects. The
effect of T -duality can easily be understood by viewing it as a one-sided parity transformation. For closed strings, the original coordinate is X m (z, z̄) =
X m (z) + X m (z̄) and the dual is X ′m (z, z̄) = X m (z) − X m (z̄). The action of
world sheet parity reversal is to exchange X µ (z) and X µ (z̄). In terms of the
dual coordinate this is
X ′m (z, z̄) ↔ −X ′m (z̄, z),

(58)

which is the product of a world-sheet and a spacetime parity operation. In
the unoriented theory, strings are invariant under the action of Ω, so in the
dual theory we have gauged the product of world-sheet parity with a spacetime
symmetry, here parity. This generalization of the usual unoriented theory is
known as an orientifold, a play on the term orbifold for gauging a discrete
spacetime symmetry.
Separate the string wavefunction into its internal part and its dependence
on the center of mass xm , and take the internal wavefunction to be an eigenstate
of Ω. The projection then determines the string wavefunction at −xm to be
the same as at xm , up to a sign. For example, the various components of the
metric and antisymmetric tensor satisfy
Gµν (xµ , −xm ) = Gµν (xµ , xm ),

Bµν (xµ , −xm ) = −Bµν (xµ , xm ),

Gµn (xµ , −xm ) = −Gµn (xµ , xm ),
Gmn (xµ , −xm ) = Gmn (xµ , xm ),

Bµn (xµ , −xm ) = Bµn (xµ , xm ),
Bmn (xµ , −xm ) = −Bmn (xµ , xm ) (. 59)
(60)

In other words, the T -dual spacetime is the torus T 25−p modded by a Z2 reflection in the compact directions. This is the same as the orbifold construction,
the only difference being the extra sign. In the case of a single periodic dimension, for example, the dual spacetime is the line segment 0 ≤ x25 ≤ πR′ , with
21

orientifold fixed planes at the ends. It should be noted that orientifold planes
are not dynamical. Unlike the case of D-branes, there are no string modes tied
to the orientifold plane to represent fluctuations in its shape.d
Notice also that away from the orientifold fixed planes, the local physics is
that of the oriented string theory. Unlike the original unoriented theory, where
the projection removes half the states locally, here it relates the amplitude to
find a string at some point to the amplitude to find it at the image point.
The orientifold construction was discovered via T -duality1 and independently from other points of view.16,6 One can of course consider more general
orientifolds which are not simply T -duals of toroidal compactifications. There
have been quite a few papers on orientifolds and their various duals. This will
not be a primary focus of these lectures—we will be interested in orientifolds
mainly insofar as they arise in understanding the physics of D-branes.
In the case of open strings, the situation is similar. Let us focus for convenience on a single compact dimension. Again there is one orientifold fixed
plane at 0 and another at πR′ . Introducing SO(N ) Chan-Paton factors, a
Wilson line can be brought to the form
diag{θ1 , −θ1 , θ2 , −θ2 , · · · , θN/2 , −θN/2 }.

(61)

Thus in the dual picture there are 12 N D-branes on the line segment 0 ≤
X ′25 < πR′ , and 21 N at their image points under the orientifold identification.
Strings can stretch between D-branes and their images as shown. The generic
gauge group is U (1)N/2 . As in the oriented case, if m D-branes are coincident
there is a U (m) gauge group. But now if the m D-branes in addition lie at one
of the fixed planes, then strings stretching between one of these branes and
one of the image branes also become massless and we have the right spectrum
of additional states to fill out SO(2m). The maximal SO(N ) is restored if
all of the branes are coincident at a single orientifold plane. Note that this
maximally symmetric case is asymmetric between the two fixed planes. Similar
considerations apply to U Sp(N ).
We should emphasize that there are 21 N dynamical D-branes but an N valued Chan-Paton index. An interesting case is when m + 12 D-branes lie on a
fixed plane, which makes sense because the number 2m+ 1 of indices is integer.
A brane plus image can move away from the fixed plane, but the number of
branes remaining is always half-integer.
d Our heuristic argument that a gravitational wave forces a D-brane to oscillate does not
apply to the orientifold fixed plane. Essentially, the identifications (60) become boundary
conditions at the fixed plane, such that the incident and reflected waves cancel. For the
D-brane, the reflected wave is higher order in the string coupling.

22

- θ2R'

- θ1R'

0

θ1R'

θ2R'

πR'

Figure 8: Orientifold planes at 0 and πR′ , D-branes at θ1 R′ and θ2 R′ , and D-brane images at
-θ1 R′ and −θ2 R′ . The twist operator Ω acts on any string by a combination of a spacetime
reflection and reversing the orientation arrow.

The orientifold plane, like the D-brane, couples to the dilaton and metric.
The amplitude is the same as in the previous section, but with RP 2 in place
of the disk; that is, a crosscap replaces the boundary loop. The orientifold
identifies X m with −X m at the opposite point on the crosscap, so the crosscap
is localized near one of the orientifold fixed planes. Again the easiest way to
calculate this is via vacuum graphs, the cylinder with one or both boundary
loops replaced by crosscaps. These give the Möbius strip and Klein bottle,
respectively. To understand this, consider figure 10, which shows two copies of
the fundamental region for the Möbius strip. The lower half is identified with
the reflection of the upper, and the edges σ 1 = 0, π are boundaries. Taking
the lower half as the fundamental region gives the familiar representation of
the Möbius strip as a strip of length 2πt, with ends twisted and glued. Taking
instead the left half of the figure, the line σ 1 = 0 is a boundary loop while
the line σ 1 = π/2 is identified with itself under a shift σ 2 → σ 2 + 2πt plus
reflection of σ 1 : it is a crosscap. The same construction applies to the Klein
bottle, with the right and left edges now identified.
23

b)

a)

Figure 9: a) Möbius strip as cylinder with crosscap at one end. b) Klein bottle as cylinder
with crosscaps at each end.

2πt

σ2
0

0

π

σ1

Figure 10: Two copies of the fundamental region for the Möbius strip.

The Möbius strip is given by the vacuum amplitude
Z ∞
Z
dp+1 k
dt X Ωi −2πα′ t(p2 +MI2 )
e
,
AM = Vp+1
p+1
(2π)
2t
2
0

(62)

I

where ΩI is the Ω eigenvalue of state i. The oscillator contribution to ΩI is
(−1)N from eq. (13).e For the SO(N ) open string the Chan-Paton factors
have 21 N (N + 1) even states and 21 N (N − 1) odd for a net of +N . For U Sp(N )
these numbers are reversed for a net of −N . Focus on a D-brane and its
e In the directions orthogonal to the brane and orientifold there are two additional signs in

ΩI which cancel: the world-sheet parity contributes an extra minus sign in the directions
with Dirichlet boundary conditions (this is evident from the mode expansion (97)), and the
spacetime reflection an additional sign.

24

image, which correspondingly contribute ±2. The diagonal elements, which
contribute to the trace, are those where one end is on the D-brane and one on
its image. The total separation is then Y m = 2X m . Then,
Z ∞
(p+1)
′
dt
AM = ±Vp+1
(8π 2 α′ t)− 2 e−2X·Xt/πα
2t
0
#
"
∞
Y
−2
4k−2 −24
4k −24
(63)
q
(1 + q
) (1 − q )
k=1

The factor in braces [ ] is
f3 (q 2 )−24 f1 (q 2 )−24

=
=

One thus finds a pole
∓ 2p−12 Vp+1

(2t)12 f3 (e−π/2t )−24 f1 (e−π/2t )−24


(2t)12 eπ/2t − 24 + . . . .

3π
(4π 2 α′ )11−p G25−p (X 2 ) .
26

(64)

(65)

′ 2
2
This is to be compared with the field theory result D−2
2 Vp+1 Tp Tp κ0 G25−p (Y ),
′
where Tp is the fixed-plane tension. A factor of 2 as compared to the earlier
field theory calculation (53) comes because the spacetime boundary forces all
the flux in one direction. Thus the fixed-plane and D-brane tensions are related

τp′ = ∓2p−13 τp .

(66)

A similar calculation with the Klein bottle gives a result proportional to τp′2 .
Noting that there are 225−p fixed planes, the total fixed-plane source is
12
∓2 τp . The total source must vanish because the volume is finite and there
is no place for flux to go. Thus there are 212 D-branes (times two for the
images) and the group is SO(213 ) = SO(2D/2 ).33 For this group the dilaton
and graviton tadpoles cancel at order g −1 . This has no special significance
in the bosonic string, as the one loop g 0 tadpoles are nonzero and imaginary
due to the tachyon instability, but similar boundary combinatorics will give a
restriction on anomaly free Chan-Paton gauge groups in the superstring.
3

Lecture 3: Superstrings and T -Duality

3.1

Open Superstrings

All of the exotic phenomena that we found in the bosonic string will appear
in the superstring as well, together with some important new ingredients. We
first review open and unoriented superstrings.
25

The superstring world-sheet action is
Z
1
¯ µ + ψ µ ∂ψ
¯ µ + ψ̃ µ ∂ ψ̃µ }
S=
d2 σ{α′−1 ∂X µ ∂X
4π M

(67)

where the open string world-sheet is the strip 0 < σ 1 < π, −∞ < σ 2 < ∞.
The condition that the surface term in the equation of motion vanishes allows
two possible Lorentz invariant boundary conditions on world-sheet fermions:
R:
NS:

ψ µ (0, σ 2 ) = ψ˜µ (0, σ 2 )
ψ µ (0, σ 2 ) = −ψ˜µ (0, σ 2 )

ψ µ (π, σ 2 ) = ψ˜µ (π, σ 2 )
ψ µ (π, σ 2 ) = ψ˜µ (π, σ 2 )

(68)

We can always take the boundary condition at one end, say σ 1 = π, to have
a + sign by redefinition of ψ̃. The boundary conditions and equations of
motion are conveniently summarized by the doubling trick, taking just leftmoving (analytic) fields ψ µ on the range 0 to 2π and defining ψ̃ µ (σ 1 , σ 2 ) to
be ψ µ (2π − σ 1 , σ 2 ). These left-moving fields are periodic in the Ramond (R)
sector and antiperiodic in the Neveu-Schwarz (NS).
In the NS sector the fermionic oscillators are half-integer moded, giving a
8
8
ground state energy of (− 24
) + (− 48
) = − 21 from the eight transverse coordinates and eight transverse fermions. The ground state is a Lorentz singlet and
has odd fermion number, (−1)F = −1. This assignment is necessary in order
for (−1)F to be multiplicatively conserved.f The GSO projection, onto states
with even fermion number, removes the open string tachyon from the superstring spectrum. Massless particle states in ten dimensions are classified by
their SO(8) representation under Lorentz rotations that leave the momentum
invariant. The lowest lying states in the NS sector are the eight transverse
polarizations of the massless open string photon, Aµ ,
µ
ψ−1/2
|ki,

M2 =

1
(N − 12 )
α′

(69)

forming the vector of SO(8).
The fermionic oscillators in the Ramond sector are integer-moded. In
the R sector the ground state energy always vanishes because the world-sheet
bosons and their superconformal partners have the same moding. The Ramond
vacuum is degenerate, since the ψ0µ take ground states into ground states, so
the latter form a representation of the ten-dimensional Dirac matrix algebra
{ψ0µ , ψ0ν } = η µν .

(70)

f In the ‘−1 picture’34 the matter part of the ground state vertex operator is the identity

but the ghost part has odd fermion number. In the ‘0 picture’ this is reversed.

26

The following basis for this representation is often convenient. Form the combinations
d±
i

=

d±
0

=


1
√ ψ02i ± iψ02i+1
2

1
√ ψ01 ∓ ψ00
2

i = 1, · · · , 4
(71)

In this basis, the Clifford algebra takes the form
−
{d+
i , dj } = δij .

(72)

The d±
i , i = 0, · · · , 4 act as raising and lowering operators, generating the 32
Ramond ground states. Denote these states
|s0 , s1 , s2 , s3 , s4 i = |si

(73)

where each of the si is ± 21 , and where
1
1
1
1
1
d−
i | − 2, −2, −2, −2, −2i = 0

(74)

1
1
while d+
i raises si from − 2 to 2 . The significance of this notation is as follows.
The fermionic part of the ten-dimensional Lorentz generators is

S µν = −

i X [µ ν]
ψ−r ψr
2

(75)

r∈Z+κ

where κ = 0 ( 21 ) in the R (NS) sector. The states above are eigenstates of
S0 = iS 01 , Si = S 2i,2i+1 , with si the corresponding eigenvalues. Since the
Lorentz generators always flip an even number of si , the Dirac representation
32 decomposes into a 16 with an even number of − 12 ’s and 16′ with an odd
number.
Physical states are annihilated by the zero mode of the supersymmetry
generator, which on the ground states reduces to G0 = pµ ψ0µ . In the frame
p0 = p1 this becomes s0 = 12 , giving a sixteen-fold degeneracy for the physical
Ramond vacuum. This is a representation of SO(8) which again decomposes
into 8s with an even number of − 21 ’s and 8c with an odd number.
The GSO projection keeps one irreducible representation; the two choices,
16 or 16′ , are physically equivalent, differing only by a spacetime parity redefinition. It is useful to think of the GSO projection in terms of locality of the
OPE of a general vertex operator with the gravitino vertex operator. Suppose
we take a projection which includes the operator e−φ/2+i(H0 +H1 +H2 +H3 +H4 )/2 ,
27

where the Hi are the bosonization of ψ µ .34 In the NS sector this has a branch
cut with the ground state vertex operator e−φ , accounting for the sign discussed in footnote f for the −1 picture vertex operator. In the R sector the
ghost plus longitudinal part of the OPE is local, so we have
4
X

si = 0

(mod 2),

(76)

i=1

picking out the 8s .
The ground state spectrum is then 8v ⊕ 8s , a vector multiplet of D = 10,
N = 1 spacetime supersymmetry. Including Chan-Paton factors gives again
a U (N ) gauge theory in the oriented theory and SO(N ) or U Sp(N ) in the
unoriented.
3.2

Closed Superstrings

The closed string spectrum is the product of two copies of the open string
spectrum, with right- and left-moving levels matched. In the open string the
two choices for the GSO projection were equivalent, but in the closed string
there are two inequivalent choices, taking the same (IIB) or opposite (IIA)
projections on the two sides. These lead to the massless sectors
Type IIA:
Type IIB:

(8v ⊕ 8s ) ⊗ (8v ⊕ 8c )
(8v ⊕ 8s ) ⊗ (8v ⊕ 8s )

(77)

of SO(8).
The various products are as follows. In the NS-NS sector, this is
8v ⊗ 8v = φ ⊕ Bµν ⊕ Gµν = 1 ⊕ 28 ⊕ 35.

(78)

In the R-R sector, the IIA and IIB spectra are respectively
8s ⊗ 8c
8s ⊗ 8s

=
=

[1] ⊕ [3] = 8v ⊕ 56t
[0] ⊕ [2] ⊕ [4]+ = 1 ⊕ 28 ⊕ 35+ .

(79)

Here [n] denotes the n-times antisymmetrized representation of SO(8), with
[4]+ being self-dual. Note that the representations [n] and [8 − n] are the same,
being related by contraction with the 8-dimensional ǫ-tensor. The NS-NS and
R-R spectra together form the bosonic components of D = 10 IIA (nonchiral)
and IIB (chiral) supergravity respectively. In the NS-R and R-NS sectors are
the products
8v ⊗ 8c

8v ⊗ 8s

= 8s ⊕ 56c

= 8c ⊕ 56s .
28

(80)

The 56s,c are gravitinos, their vertex operators having one vector and one
spinor index. They must couple to conserved spacetime supercurrents. In the
IIA theory the two gravitinos (and supercharges) have opposite chirality, and
in the IIB the same.
Let us develop further the vertex operators for the R-R states. This will
ϕ
ϕ̃
involve a product of spin fields,34 e− 2 − 2 Sα S̃β . These again decompose into
antisymmetric tensors, now of SO(9, 1):
ϕ

ϕ̃

V = e− 2 − 2 Sα S̃β (Γ[µ1 · · · Γµn ] C)αβ G[µ1 ···µn ] (X)

(81)

with C the charge conjugation matrix. In the IIA theory the product is 16⊗16′
giving even n (with n ∼
= 10 − n) and in the IIB theory it is 16 ⊗ 16 giving
odd n. As is usual, the classical equations of motion follow from the physical
state conditions, which at the massless level reduce to G0 · V = G̃0 · V =
0. The relevant part of G0 is just pµ ψ0µ and similarly for G̃0 . The pµ acts
by differentiation on G, while ψ0µ acts on the spin fields as it does on the
corresponding ground states: as multiplication by Γµ . Noting the identity


(82)
Γν Γ[µ1 · · · Γµn ] = Γ[ν · · · Γµn ] + δ νµ1 Γ[µ2 · · · Γµn ] + perms

and similarly for right multiplication, the physical state conditions become
d∗ G = 0.

dG = 0

(83)

These are the Bianchi identity and field equation for an antisymmetric tensor
field strength. This is in accord with the representations found: in the IIA
theory we have odd-rank tensors of SO(8) but even-rank tensors of SO(9, 1)
(and reversed in the IIB), the extra index being contracted with the momentum to form the field strength. It also follows that R-R amplitudes involving
elementary strings vanish at zero momentum, so strings do not carry R-R
charges.
As an aside, when the dilaton background is nontrivial, the Ramond generators have a term φ,µ ∂ψ µ , and the Bianchi identity and field strength pick
up terms proportional to dφ ∧ G and dφ ∧ ∗ G. The Bianchi identity is nonstandard, so G is not of the form dC. Defining G′ = e−φ G removes the extra
term from both the Bianchi identity and field strength. The field G′ is thus
decoupled from the dilaton. In terms of the action, the fields G in the vertex
operators appear with the usual closed string e−2φ but with non-standard dilaton gradient terms. The fields we are calling G′ (which in fact are the usual
fields used in the literature) have a dilaton-independent action.
29

The IIB theory is invariant under world-sheet parity, so we can again form
an unoriented theory by gauging. Projecting onto Ω = +1 interchanges leftmoving and right-moving oscillators and so one linear combination of the R-NS
and NS-R gravitinos survives, leaving D = 10, N = 1 supergravity. In the NSNS sector, the dilaton and graviton are symmetric under Ω and survive, while
the antisymmetric tensor is odd and is projected out. In the R-R sector, it is
clear by counting that the 1 and 35+ are in the symmetric product of 8s ⊗ 8s
while the 28 is in the antisymmetric. The R-R vertex operator is the product
of right- and left-moving fermions, so there is an extra minus in the exchange
and it is the 28 that survives. The bosonic massless sector is thus 1 ⊕ 28 ⊕ 35,
the D = 10 N = 1 supergravity multiplet. This is the same multiplet as in the
heterotic string, but now the antisymmetric tensor is from the R-R sector.
The open superstring has only N = 1 supersymmetry. In order that the
closed strings couple consistently they must also have N = 1 supergravity and
so the theory must be unoriented. In fact, spacetime anomaly cancellation
implies that the only consistent N = 1 superstring is the SO(32) open plus
closed string theory. Now, as a general principle any such inconsistency in the
low energy theory should be related to some stringy inconsistency. This is the
case, but it will be more convenient to discuss this later after some discussion
of T -duality.
3.3

T -Duality of Type II Superstrings

Even in the closed oriented Type II theories T -duality has an interesting
effect.20,1 . Consider compactifying a single coordinate X 9 . In the R → ∞
limit the momenta are p9R = p9L , while in the R → 0 limit p9R = −p9L . Both
theories are SO(9, 1) invariant but under different SO(9, 1)’s. Duality reverses
the sign of the right-moving X 9 (z̄); therefore by superconformal invariance it
does so on ψ̃ 9 (z̄). Separate the Lorentz generators into their left-and rightmoving parts M µν + M̃ µν . Duality reverses all terms in M̃ µ9 , so the µ9 Lorentz
generators of the T -dual theory are M µ9 − M̃ µ9 . In particular this reverses the
sign of the helicity s̃4 and so switches the chirality on the right-moving side.
If one starts in the IIA theory, with opposite chiralities, the R → 0 theory has
the same chirality on both sides and is the R → ∞ limit of the IIB theory, and
vice versa. More simply put, duality is a one-sided spacetime parity operation
and so reverses the relative chiralities of the right- and left-moving ground
states. The same is true if one dualizes on any odd number of dimensions,
while dualizing on an even number returns the original Type II theory.
Since the IIA and IIB theories have different R-R fields, T9 duality must
transform one set into the other. The action of duality on the spin fields is of
30

the form
S̃α (z̄) → P9 S̃α (z̄)

Sα (z) → Sα (z),

(84)

for some matrix P9 , the parity transformation (9-reflection) on the spinors. In
order for this to be consistent with the action ψ̃ 9 → −ψ̃ 9 , P9 must anticommute with Γ9 and commute with the remaining Γµ . Thus P9 = Γ9 Γ11 (the
phase of P9 is determined, up to sign, by hermiticity of the spin field). Now
consider the effect on the R-R vertex operators (81). The Γ11 just contributes
a sign, because the spin fields have definite chirality. Then by the Γ-matrix
identity (82), the effect is to add a 9-index to G if none is present, or to remove
one if it is. The effect on the potential C (G = dC) is the same. Take as an
example the Type IIA vector Cµ . The component C9 maps to the IIB scalar
C, while the µ 6= 9 components map to Cµ9 . The remaining components of
Cµν come from Cµν9 , and so on.
3.4

T -Duality of Type I Superstrings

The action of T -duality in the open and unoriented Type I theory produces
D-branes and orientifold planes, just as in the bosonic string. Let us focus
here on a single D-brane, taking a limit in which the other D-branes and the
orientifold planes are distant and can be ignored. Away from the D-brane,
only closed strings propagate. The local physics is that of the Type II theory,
with two gravitinos. This is true even if though we began with the unoriented
Type I theory which has only a single gravitino. The point is that the closed
string begins with two gravitinos, one with the spacetime supersymmetry on
the right-moving side of the world-sheet and one on the left. The orientation
projection of the Type I theory leaves one linear combination of these. But
in the T -dual theory, the orientation projection does not constrain the local
state of the string, but relates it to the state of the (distant) image gravitino.
Locally there are two independent gravitinos, with equal chiralities if an even
number of dimensions have been dualized and opposite if an odd number.
However, the open string boundary conditions are invariant under only
one supersymmetry. In the original Type I theory, the left-moving world-sheet
current for spacetime supersymmetry jα (z) flows into the boundary and the
right-moving current j̃α (z̄) flows out, so only the total charge Qα + Q̃α of the
left- and right-movers is conserved. Under T -duality this becomes
Q
(85)
Qα + ( m Pm ) Q̃α ,
where the product of reflections Pm runs over all the dualized dimensions, that
is, over all directions orthogonal to the D-brane. Closed strings couple to open,
so the general amplitude has only one linearly realized supersymmetry. That
31

is, the vacuum without D-branes is invariant under N = 2 supersymmetry, but
the state containing the D-brane is invariant under only N = 1: it is a BPS
state.2,13
BPS states must carry conserved charges. In the present case there is only
one set of charges with the correct Lorentz properties, namely the antisymmetric R-R charges. The world volume of a p-brane naturally couples to a
(p + 1)-form potential C(p+1) , which has a (p + 2)-form field strength G(p+2) .
This identification can also be made from the g −1 behavior of the D-brane tension: this is the behavior of an R-R soliton.35−39 , as will be developed further
in section 5.8.
The IIA theory has p = 0, 2, 4, 6, and 8-branes. The vertex operators (81)
describe field strengths of all even ranks from 0 to 10. By a Γ-matrix identity
the n-form and (10 − n)-form field strengths are Hodge dual to one another, so
a p-brane and (6 − p)-brane are sources for the same field, but one ‘magnetic’
and one ‘electric.’ The field equation for the 10-form field strength allows no
propagating states, but the field can still have a physically significant energy
density 2,40−41 . Curiously, the 0-form field strength should couple to a (−2)brane, but it is not clear how to interpret this—perhaps there is something
interesting to learn here.
The IIB theory has p = −1, 1, 3, 5, 7, and 9-branes. The vertex operators (81) describe field strengths of all odd ranks from 1 to 9, appropriate to
couple to all but the 9-brane. The 9-brane does couple to a nontrivial potential,
as we will see below.
A (−1)-brane is a Dirichlet instanton, defined by Dirichlet conditions in
the time direction as well as all spatial directions.10 Of course, it is not clear
that T -duality in the time direction has any meaning, but one can argue for
the presence of (−1)-branes as follows. Given 0-branes in the IIA theory, there
should be virtual 0-brane world-lines that wind in a purely spatial direction.
Such world-lines are required by quantum mechanics, but note that they are
essentially instantons, being localized in time. A T -duality in the winding
direction then gives a (−1)-brane. One of the first clues to the relevance of
D-branes11 was the observation that D-instantons, having action g −1 , would
contribute effects of order e−1/g as expected from the behavior of large orders
of string perturbation theory.12

32

3.5

The D-Brane Action and Charge

We have concluded that the D-brane must couple to a (p + 1)-form potential.
The spacetime plus D-brane action then includes
Z
Z
1
∗
S=
G(p+2) G(p+2) + iµp
C(p+1) ,
(86)
2
p−brane
where the (p + 1)-form charge of the D p-brane is denoted µp .g As discussed
earlier, the dilaton does not appear in the action. However, there are additional terms involving the D-brane gauge field, similar to the Born-Infeld
terms. Again these can be determined from T -duality. Consider, as an example, a 1-brane in the 1-2 plane. The action is
Z

dx1 C1 + ∂1 X 2 C2 .
(87)
Under a T -duality in the 2-direction this becomes
Z
dx1 (C12 + 2πα′ F12 C) .

(88)

We have used the T -transformation of the C fields as discussed in section 3.3.h
This argument is easily generalized, with the Chern-Simons-like result
Z
P

′
(89)
iµp
Tr e2πα F +B
p C(p+1) .
p−brane

The expansion of the integrand (89) involves forms of various rank; the integral
picks out precisely the terms that are proportional to the volume form of the pbrane.42−43,25,27 There are also couplings of the R-R potentials to curvature.44,45
In addition, the coupling of the D-brane to NS-NS and open string states has
the same form (38) as the bosonic D-brane theory.
The D-brane, unlike the fundamental string, carries R-R charge. It is
interesting to see how this is consistent with our earlier discussion of string
vertex operators.46 The R-R vertex operator (81) is in the (− 21 , − 12 ) picture,
which can be used in almost all processes. In the disk, however, the total
right+left ghost number must be −2. With two or more R-R vertex operators,

g This action is not correct for p = 3, for which the field strength is self-dual. There is no
covariant action in this case.
h We have not kept track of the overall normalization but one could, with the result µ =
p
√
µp−1 /2π α′ analogous to the earlier result (44) for Tp . Instead we will obtain µp directly
later.

33

all can be in the (− 21 , − 12 ) picture (with picture changing operators included
as well), but a single vertex operator must be in either the (− 23 , − 12 ) or the
(− 12 , − 23 ) picture. The (− 21 , − 21 ) vertex operator is essentially e−ϕ G0 times
the (− 32 , − 21 ) operator, so besides the shift in the ghost number the latter
has one less power of momentum and one less Γ-matrix. The missing factor of
momentum turns G into C, and the missing Γ-matrix gives the correct Lorentz
representations for the potential rather than the field strength.
To obtain the D-brane tension and R-R charge, one can consider the same
vacuum cylinder as in the bosonic string.2 Carrying out the traces over the
open superstring spectrum gives
Z
Y2
dt
(8π 2 α′ t)−(p+1)/2 e−t 2πα′
A = 2Vp+1
2t
−f2 (q)8 + f3 (q)8 − f4 (q)8
,
(90)
2f18 (q)
where again q = e−πt . The three terms in the fraction come from the open
string R sector with 21 in the trace, from the NS sector with 12 in the trace,
and the NS sector with 12 (−1)F in the trace; the R sector with 21 (−1)F gives
no net contribution. These three terms sum to zero by the ‘abstruse identity,’
because the open string spectrum is supersymmetric. In terms of the closed
string exchange, this reflects the fact that D-branes are BPS states, the net
forces from NS-NS and R-R exchanges canceling. The separate exchanges can
be identified as follows. In the terms with (−1)F , the world-sheet fermions
are periodic around the cylinder thus corresponding to R-R exchange, while
the terms without (−1)F have antiperiodic fermions and come from NS-NS
exchange. Obtaining the t → 0 behavior as before gives
Z
Y2
1
dt
ANS = −AR ∼
Vp+1
(2πt)−(p+1)/2 (t/2πα′ )4 e−t 8π2 α′2
2
t
= Vp+1 2π(4π 2 α′ )3−p G9−p (Y 2 ).
(91)
Comparing with field theory calculations gives2
µ2p = 2κ2 τp2 = 2π(4π 2 α′ )3−p .

(92)

D-branes that are not parallel feel a net force because the cancellation is
no longer exact. In the extreme case, where one of the D-branes is rotated by
π, the coupling to the dilaton and graviton is unchanged but the coupling to
the R-R tensor is reversed in sign, and the two terms in the cylinder amplitude
add. In fact, a well-known divergence of Dirichlet boundary conditions sets in
34

for non-parallel branes: the t-integration diverges at zero. This is similar to
the Hagedorn divergence, and represents an instability of antiparallel D-branes
when brought too close.47
The orientifold planes also break half the supersymmetry and are R-R
and NS-NS sources. In the original Type I theory the orientation projection
keeps only the linear
combination Qα + Q̃α . In the T -dualized theory this
Q
becomes Qα + ( m Pm )Q̃α just as for the D-branes. The force between an
orientifold plane and a D-brane can be obtained from the Möbius strip as in
the bosonic case; again the total is zero and can be separated into NS-NS and
R-R exchanges. The result is similar to the bosonic result (65),
µ′p = ∓2p−5 µp ,

τp′ = ∓2p−5 τp .

(93)

Since there are 29−p orientifold planes, the total fixed-plane charge is ∓16µp ,
and the total fixed-plane tension is ∓16τp .
A nonzero total tension represents a source for the graviton and dilaton, so
that at order g these fields become time dependent as in the Fischler-Susskind
mechanism.48 A nonzero total R-R source is more serious: the field equations
are inconsistent, because R-R flux lines have no place to go in the compact
space.i So we need exactly 16 D-branes with the SO projection, giving the
T -dual of SO(32).
The spacetime anomalies for G 6= SO(32) are thus accompanied by a
divergence.49 The reason for this is as follows. As in field theory, one can relate
the anomaly to the ultraviolet limit of an (open string) loop graph. But string
theory has no true ultraviolet limits. This limit of the annulus (t → ∞) is
instead the infrared limit of the closed string tree graph, and the anomaly
comes from this infrared divergence. From the world-sheet point of view there
is a conformal anomaly that cannot be canceled because of the inconsistency of
the field equations. All this applies even in the original D = 10 Type I theory.30
The Neumann open strings correspond to 9-branes, since the endpoints can be
anywhere. The Dirichlet and orientifold 9-branes couple to an R-R 10-form,
Z
µ10
i(32 ∓ N )
A10 ,
(94)
2
and the field equation from varying A10 is just G = SO(32)!30
4

Lecture 4: Advanced D-Mechanics

i The Chern-Simons coupling (89) implies that the open string field strengths are also R-R

sources, so there can also be consistent solutions with nonzero values for these.

35

4.1

Discussion

We have seen that T -duality of the Type I string leads to a theory with precisely
16 Dirichlet p-branes on a T9−p /Z2 orientifold, for any given value of p. We
now understand that the restriction to 16 comes from conservation of R-R
charge. It follows that in a non-compact space, where the flux lines could run to
infinity, we could have a consistent theory with any number and configuration
of p-branes, with all p being even in the IIA theory or odd in the IIB.
Indeed, cluster decomposition plus T -duality forces this upon us. Let us
start from the Type I theory and see how far we can get by combination of
T -dualities, turning on background fields, taking limits, and cluster decomposition. First, let us take the T -dual on all spatial directions and then the
R → 0 limit. We are left with 16 D 0-branes at arbitrary positions. But now
cluster decomposition says j that if we can have a state with 16 0-branes in
this room and none behind the moon, or vice versa, then we can also have a
state with 16 in each place, or none. That is, states with arbitrary numbers
of 0-branes are in the spectrum. In particular, the state with no 0-branes is
just what we would call the Type IIA theory, giving also the IIB theory by
T -duality. So both Type II theories can be regarded as states within the Type
I theory.
Similarly by T -duality from this we get a state with any number of p-branes
for any fixed p. The T -dual of a flat torus gives flat D-branes, but because
they are dynamical this is continuously connected to configurations where the
D-branes fold back and forth, and in this way one can reach a configuration
which in any local region has an arbitrary set of p-branes. Now rotate some of
the p-branes 90◦ (which is T -dual to turning on a gauge field) and T -dualize in
a direction parallel to some and perpendicular to others. Some become (p + 1)branes and some (p−1)-branes. In this way we can obtain any collection of even
D-branes in the IIA theory or odd D-branes in the IIB. So far, these D-branes
are all wound around tori, or infinite in the limit, but again by a cluster-type
argument one should be able to build a D-brane of arbitrary topology out of
D-stuff that is locally the same. So what is usually called the Type I theory
should be regarded as including the Types I, IIA and IIB theories with any
collection of D-branes. These are all consistent string theories, provided that
the D-branes satisfy the appropriate equations of motion and the R-R field
equations are consistent.
It is conceivable that there is another Type II string theory that has no
D-branes at all, but Occam’s razor would suggest that there is likely to be only
one non-perturbative completion of a given string theory.
j This is my paraphrase. See Weinberg’s text50 for a more discussion.

36

Now that we are considering configurations of p-branes with several values
of p there is an important consistency check. The field strengths to which a
p-brane and (6 − p)-brane couple are dual to one another, G(p+2) = ∗G(8−p) .
This implies a Dirac quantization condition, as generalized by Teitelboim and
Nepomechie.51 Integrating the field strength ∗G(p+2) on an (8 − p)-sphere surrounding a p-brane, the action (86) gives a total flux Φ = µp . We can write
∗G(p+2) = G(8−p) = dC(7−p) everywhere except on a Dirac ‘string’. Then
Z
Z
C(7−p) .
(95)
∗G(p+2) =
Φ=
S7−p

S8−p

where we perform the last integral on a small sphere surrounding the Dirac
string. A (6 − p)-brane circling the string picks up a phase eiµ6−p Φ . The
condition that the string be invisible is
µ6−p Φ = µ6−p µp = 2πn.

(96)

The D-branes charges (92) satisfy this with the minimum quantum n = 1.k
This calculation has the look of a ‘string miracle.’ It is not at all obvious
why the one-loop open string calculation should have given just this result.
Had the R-R charges not satisfied the quantization condition, one could likely
use the argument from the first paragraph of this section to show that the Type
I theory has some sort of non-perturbative anomaly. A topological derivation
of the D-brane charge has been given.45
4.2

The p-p′ System

Simple T -duality gives parallel D-branes all with the same dimension but now
we are considering more general configurations. In this section we consider two
D-branes, each parallel to the coordinate axes.l An open string can have both
ends on the same D-brane or one on each. The p − p and p′ − p′ spectra are
the same as before, but the p − p′ strings are new. Since we are taking the
D-branes to be parallel to the coordinate axes, there are four possible sets of
boundary conditions for each spatial coordinate X i of the open string, namely
NN (Neumann at both ends), DD, ND, and DN. What really will matter is the
k This argument does not apply directly to the case p =

3, as the self-dual 5-form field
strength has no covariant action, but the result follows for p = 3 by T -duality. Consider
3-branes extended in the 456 and 789 directions. Both are local in the 123 direction. The
Dirac quantization argument is made by considering the dependence of the wavefunction on
the 123 coordinate; but this is the same if we T -dualize to a 45 2-brane and a 6789 4-brane,
for which n = 1 is already established.
l This has been extended to D-branes at angles by Berkooz, Douglas, and Leigh.52

37

number ν of ND plus DN coordinates. A T -duality can switch NN and DD,
or ND and DN, but ν is invariant. Of course ν is even because we only have p
even or p odd in a given theory.
The respective mode expansions are
r
α′ X αµm −m
µ
µ
′ µ
NN:
X (z, z̄) = x − iα p ln(z z̄) + i
(z
+ z̄ −m ),
2
m
m6=0
r
µ
′
X
αr −r
α
DN, ND:
X µ (z, z̄) = i
(z ± z̄ −r ),
(97)
2
r
r∈Z+1/2
r
µ
α′ X αµm −m
δX
µ
ln(z/z̄) + i
(z
− z̄ −m ) .
DD:
X (z, z̄) = −i
2π
2
m
m6=0

In particular, the DN and ND coordinates have half-integer moding. The
fermions have the same moding in the Ramond sector and opposite in the
Neveu-Schwarz sector. The string zero point energy is 0 in the R sector as
always, and




1 ν
1
1
1
1
+ν
=− +
+
(98)
(8 − ν) − −
24 48
48 24
2 8
in the NS sector.
The oscillators can raise the level in half-integer units, so only for ν a
multiple of 4 is degeneracy between the R and NS sectors possible. Indeed,
it is in this case that the p-p′ system is supersymmetric. Let us see this
directly. As discussed in sections 3.2 and 3.3, a D-brane leaves unbroken the
supersymmetries
Qα + P Q̃α ,
(99)
where P acts as a reflection in the direction transverse to the D-brane. With
a second D-brane, the only unbroken supersymmetries will be those that are
also of the form
Qα + P ′ Q̃α = Qα + P (P −1 P ′ )Q̃α .
(100)
with P ′ the reflection transverse to the second D-brane. Thus the unbroken
supersymmetries correspond to the +1 eigenvalues of P −1 P ′ . In DD and NN
directions this is trivial, while in DN and ND directions it is a net parity
transformation. Since the number ν of such dimensions is even, we can pair
them and write P −1 P ′ as a product of rotations by π,
eiπ(J1 +...+Jν/2 ) .
38

(101)

In a spinor representation, each eiπJ has eigenvalues ±i, so there will be unbroken supersymmetry only if ν is a multiple of 4 as found above.m
For example, Type I theory, besides the 9-branes, will have 1-branes and
5-branes. This is consistent with the fact that the only R-R field strengths are
the three-form and its Hodge-dual seven-form. The 5-brane is required to have
two Chan-Paton degrees of freedom (which can be thought of as images under
Ω) and so an SU (2) gauge group.53−54
When ν = 0, P −1 P ′ = 1 identically and there is a full ten-dimensional
spinor of supersymmetries. This is the same as for the original Type I theory,
to which it is T -dual. In D = 4 units, this is N = 4. For ν = 4 or ν = 8 there
is D = 4 N = 2 supersymmetry.
Let us now study the spectrum for ν = 4, saving ν = 8 for the next lecture.
The NS zero-point energy is zero. There are four periodic world-sheet fermions
ψ i , namely those in the ND directions. The four zero modes generate 24/2 or
four ground states, of which two survive the GSO projection. In the R sector
the zero-point energy is also zero; there are four periodic transverse ψ, from
the NN and DD directions not counting µ = 0, 1. Again these generate four
ground states of which two survive the GSO projection. The full content then
is half of an N = 2 hypermultiplet. The other half comes from the world-sheetorientation-reversed states: these are distinct because for ν 6= 0 the ends are
always on different D-branes.
Let us write the of the action for the bosonic p − p′ fields χA , starting
with (p, p′ ) = (9, 5). Here A is a doublet index under the SU (2)R of the
N = 2 algebra. The field χA has charges (+1, −1) under the U (1) × U (1)
gauge theories on the branes. The minimally coupled action is then
!
 3

Z
5
X
1 X † I 2
1
2
6
′
+ 2
d ξ
(χ τ χ)
,
(102)
|(∂a + iAa − iAa )χ| +
4gp2
4gp′
a=0
I=1

with Aa and A′a the brane gauge fields, gp and gp′ the effective Yang-Mills
couplings, and τ I the SU (2) matrices. The second term is from the N = 2
D-terms for the two gauge fields. The integral is over the 5-brane worldvolume, which lies in the 9-brane world-volume. Under T -dualities in any of
the ND directions, one obtains (p, p′ ) = (8, 6), (7, 7), (6, 8), or (5, 9), but the
intersection of the branes remains (5 + 1)-dimensional and the p-p′ strings
live on the intersection with action (102). In the present case the D-term is
nonvanishing only for χA = 0, though more generally (say when there are
several coincident p and p′ -branes), there will be additional massless charged
fields and flat directions arise.
m We will see that there are supersymmetric bound states when ν = 2.

39

Under T -dualities in r NN directions, one obtains (p, p′ ) = (9 − r, 5 − r).
The action becomes
Z
5−r
5
X
X
χ† χ
2
6−r
′
d ξ
|(∂a + iAa − iAa )χ| +
(Xa − Xa′ )2
′ )2
(2πα
a=0
a=6−r
!
X

3
1
1
† I
2
(χ τ χ)
.
(103)
+
+
4gp2 4gp2′ i=1
The second term, proportional to the separation of the branes, is from the
tension of the stretched string.
4.3

The BPS Bound

The N = 2 supersymmetry algebra (in a Majorana basis) is
′
{Qα , Qβ } = 2(Γ0 Γµ )αβ (Pµ + QN
µ /2πα )

′
{Q̃α , Q̃β } = 2(Γ0 Γµ )αβ (Pµ − QN
µ /2πα )
X
τp (Γ0 Γm1 . . . Γmp )αβ QR
{Qα , Q̃β } = 2
m1 ...mp .

(104)

{m}

Here QN is the charge to which the NS-NS two-form couples and QR are the
R-R charges, all normalized to one per unit world-volume. The sum runs over
all ordered sets m1 < m2 < . . . < mp such that p is even for IIA or odd
for IIB. The R-R charges appear in the product of the right- and left-moving
supersymmetries, since the corresponding vertex operators are a product of
spin fields, while the NS-NS charges appear in right-right and left-left.
It is natural to define the dimensionless string coupling g = eφ to be the
ratio of the fundamental (F-)string and D-string tensions in the IIB theory, so
that
√
(2π α′ )1−p
.
(105)
τp =
2πα′ g
Comparing this with the string calculation (92) fixes the relation between g and
κ = gκ0 and so determines the normalization κ0 of the spacetime action (11),28
κ0 = 8π 7/2 α′2 .

(106)

As an example consider an object with the charges of q1 F-strings and q2
D-strings in the IIB theory, at rest and aligned along the one-direction. The
anticommutator implies



 h
i  1 0 
Qα
q1
q2 /g v1 Γ0 Γ1
=
M+
, Qβ Q̃β
(107)
0 1
q2 /g −q1
Q̃α
2πα′
40

where v1 is the length of the system. The eigenvalues of Γ0 Γ1 are ±1 so those
of the right-hand side are M ±v1 (q12 +q22 /g 2 )1/2 /2πα′ . The left side is a positive
matrix, giving the BPS bound on the tension55
p
q12 + q22 /g 2
M
≥
.
(108)
v1
2πα′
This is saturated by the fundamental string, (q1 , q2 ) = (1, 0), and by the Dstring, (q1 , q2 ) = (0, 1).
We leave it to the reader to extend this to a system with the quantum
numbers of Dirichlet p and p′ branes. The result for ν a multiple of 4 is
(109)

M ≥ τp vp + τp′ vp′
and for ν even but not a multiple of 4 it is n
q
M ≥ τp2 vp2 + τp2′ vp2′ .

(110)

The branes are wrapped on tori of volumes vp and vp′ in order to make the
masses finite.
The results (109) and (110) are consistent with the earlier results on supersymmetry breaking. For ν a multiple of 4, a separated p-brane and p′ -brane
do indeed saturate the bound (109). For ν not a multiple of four, they do not
saturate the bound (110) and cannot be supersymmetric.
4.4

FD Bound States

Consider a parallel D-string and F-string. The total tension
τD1 + τF 1 =

g −1 + 1
2πα′

(111)

exceeds the BPS bound (108) and so this configuration is not supersymmetric.
However, it can lower its energy as shown in figure 11. (The whole discussion in
this section is based on Witten.22 ) The F-string breaks, its endpoints attached
to the D-string. The endpoints can then move off to infinity, leaving only the
D-string behind. Of course, the D-string must now carry the charge of the
F-string as well. This comes about because the F-string endpoints are charged
under the D-string gauge field, so a flux runs between them; this flux remains
′

n The

difference between the two cases comes from the relative sign of ΓM (ΓM )T and
ΓM (ΓM )T .
′

41

DF

DF

D

E

a)

E

b)

c)

Figure 11: a) Parallel D-string and F-string. b) The F-string breaks, its ends attaching to
the D-string. c) Final state: D-string with flux.

at the end. Varying the NS-NS Bµν field in the D-brane action (38), one sees
that it has a source proportional to the invariant flux Fab + Bab /2πα′ . Thus
the final D-string carries both the NS-NS and R-R two-form charges. The
flux is of order g, its energy density is of order g, and so the final tension is
(g −1 + O(g))/2πα′ . This is below the tension of the separated strings and of
the same form as the BPS bound (108) for a (1, 1) string. A more detailed
calculation shows that the final tension saturates the bound,42 so the state is
supersymmetric. In effect, the F-string dissolves in the D-string, leaving flux
behind.
To calculate the number of BPS states we should put the strings in a
box of length L to make the spectrum discrete. For the (1, 0) F-string, the
usual quantization of the ground state gives eight bosonic and eight fermionic
states moving in each direction for 162 = 256 in all. This is the ultrashort
representation of supersymmetry: half the 32 generators annihilate the BPS
state and the other half generate 28 = 256 states. The same is true of the
(0, 1) D-string and the (1, 1) bound state just found, as will be clear from the
discussion of the D-string in the next lecture.
Incidentally, the (1, 0) F-string leaves unbroken half the supersymmetry
and the (0, 1) D-string leaves unbroken a different half of the supersymmetry. The (1, 1) bound state leaves unbroken not the intersection of the two
(which is empty), but yet a different half. The unbroken symmetries are linear
combinations of the unbroken and broken supersymmetries of the D-string.
All the above extends immediately to q F-strings and one D-string, forming
42

a supersymmetric (q, 1) bound state. The more general case of q1 F-strings and
q2 D-strings is more complicated. The gauge dynamics are now non-Abelian,
the interactions are strong in the infrared, and no explicit solution is known.
When q1 and q2 have a common factor, the BPS bound makes any bound
state only neutrally stable against falling apart into subsystems. To avoid
this complication let q1 and q2 be relatively prime, so any supersymmetric
state is discretely below the continuum of separated states. This allows the
Hamiltonian to be deformed to a simpler supersymmetric Hamiltonian whose
supersymmetric states can be determined explicitly, and again there is one
ultrashort representation, 256 states. The details, which are a bit intricate,
are left to the original reference.22
4.5

0-p Bound States

Bound states of p-branes and p′ -branes have many applications. Here we focus
on p′ = 0, which can in general be reached by a T -duality.
0-0 bound states:
The BPS bound for the quantum numbers of n 0-branes is nτ0 , so any
bound state will be at the edge of the continuum. To make the bound state
counting well defined, compactify one direction and give the system momentum
m/R with m and n relatively prime.57 The bound state now lies discretely
below the continuum, because the momentum cannot be shared evenly among
unbound subsystems.
This bound state problem is T -dual to the one just considered. Taking
the T -dual, the n 0-branes become D 1-branes, while the momentum becomes
winding number, corresponding to m F-strings. There is therefore one ultrashort multiplet of supersymmetric states when m and n are relatively prime.57
This bound state should still be present back in infinite volume, since one can
take R to be large compared to the size of the bound state.
0-2 bound states: o
Now the BPS bound (110) puts any bound state discretely below the continuum. One can see a hint of a bound state forming by noticing that for a
coincident 0-brane and 2-brane the NS 0-2 string has a negative zero-point
energy (98) and so a tachyon (which survives the GSO projection), indicating
instability towards something. In fact the bound state (one short representation) is easily described: the 0-brane dissolves in the 2-brane, leaving flux.
The brane R-R action (89) contains the coupling C(1) F , so with the flux the
2-brane also carries the 0-brane charge.56 There is also one short multiplet for
n 0-branes. This same bound state is always present when ν = 2.
o This section is based on conversations with J. Harvey, G. Moore, and A. Strominger.

43

0-4 bound states:
The BPS bound (109) makes any bound state marginally stable, so the
problem is made well-defined as in the 0-0 case by compactifying and adding
momentum.58 The interactions in the action (103) are relevant in the infrared
so this is again a hard problem, but as before it can be deformed into a solvable supersymmetric system. Again there is one multiplet of bound states.58
Now, though, the bound state is invariant only under 14 of the original supersymmetry, the intersection of the supersymmetries of the 0-brane and of the
4-brane. The bound states then lie in a short (but not ultrashort) multiplet of
212 states.
For 2 0-branes and one 4-brane, one gets the correct count as follows.59
Think of the case that the volume of the 4-brane is large. The 16 supersymmetries broken by the 4-brane generate 256 states that are delocalized on the
4-brane. The 8 supersymmetries unbroken by the 4-brane and broken by the
0-brane generate 16 states (half bosonic and half fermionic), localized on the
0-brane. The total number is the product 212 . Now count the number of ways
two 0-branes can be put into their 16 states on the 4-brane: there are 8 states
with both 0-branes in the same (bosonic) state and 12 16 · 15 states with the
D-branes in different states, for a total of 8 · 16 states. But in addition, the
two-branes can bind, and there are again 16 states where the bound state binds
to the 4-brane. Indirect arguments for the existence of these bound states have
been given,59 and presumably it can be demonstrated directly by the method
used for 0-0 bound states in free space. The total, tensoring again with the
4-brane ground states, is 9 · 16 · 256.
For n 0-branes and one 4-brane, the degeneracy Dn is given by the generating functional59
∞
X

n=0

q n Dn = 256

8
∞ 
Y
1 + qk

k=1

1 − qk

,

(112)

where the term k in the product comes from bound states of k 0-branes then
bound to the 4-brane.
0-6 bound states:
The relevant bound is (110) and again any bound state would be below
the continuum. The NS zero-point energy for 0-6 strings is positive, so there
is no sign of decay. One can give 0-brane charge to the 6-brane by turning on
flux, but there is no way to do this and saturate the BPS bound. So it appears
that there are no supersymmetric bound states. Incidentally, and unlike the
0-2 case, the 0-6 interaction is repulsive, both at short distance and60 at long.
0-8 bound states:
44

I am confused by this case. There are two recent papers with some relevant
observations.61
5

Lecture 5: Applications

5.1

String Duality

Now we can use D-branes to understand the strong-coupling limits of the
theories in which they exist.
Type IIB:
Consider the D 1-brane of the IIB theory. The gauge field has no local
dynamics, so the only bosonic excitations are the transverse fluctuations. The
GSO projection on the open string Ramond ground state correlates the SO(8)
chirality with the right/left motion, so the right-moving spinors on the D-string
are in the 8s of SO(8), and the left-moving spinors in the 8c . These are the
same as the fluctuations of a fundamental IIB string.22 There, the supersymmetries Qα and Q̃α have the same chirality. Half of each spinor annihilates the
F-string and the other half generates fluctuations. Since the supersymmetries
have the same SO(9, 1) chirality, the SO(8) chirality is correlated with the
direction of motion.
Up until now we have used the string metric, but for discussing string
(E)
(s)
duality it is useful to switch to the Einstein metric, gµν = g −1/2 gµν . The
Einstein metric, for which the gravitational action has no dependence on the
dilaton, is an invariant under duality. The tensions are then
F-string:
D-string:

g 1/2 /2πα′
g −1/2 /2πα′ .

(113)

These are exact because of the BPS property.
At weak coupling the D-string is heavy and the F-string tension is the
lightest scale in the theory. At strong coupling, however, the D-string is the
lightest object in the theory,p and it is natural to believe that the theory
can be reinterpreted as a theory of weakly coupled D-strings, with g ′ = g −1 .
One cannot prove this without a nonperturbative definition of the theory, but
quantizing the light D-string implies a large number of the states that would
be found in the dual theory, and (Occam’s razor) self-duality of the IIB theory
seems by far the simplest interpretation—given that physics below the Planck
energy is described by some specific string theory, it seems likely that there is
a unique extension to higher energies. This agrees with the duality deduced
p In particular, a dimensional argument shows that the lowest-dimensional branes have the

lowest scale.62

45

Figure 12: D-string in Type I theory with attached 1-1 and 1-9 strings.

from the low energy action and other considerations.36−38 In particular, the NSNS and R-R two-form potentials, to which the D- and F-strings respectively
couple, are interchanged by this duality.q
The full duality group of the D = 10 Type IIB theory is expected to be
SL(2, Z).36−38 This relates the fundamental string not only to the R-R string
but to a whole set of strings with the quantum numbers of q1 F-strings and q2
D-strings for q1 and q2 relatively prime.55 The bound states found in section 4.4
are just what is required for SL(2, Z) duality.22 As the coupling and the R-R
scalar are varied, each of these strings becomes light at the appropriate point
in moduli space.
Type I:
For the D-strings of the Type I theory there are two modifications.64 The
first is the projection onto oriented states. The U (1) gauge field, with vertex
operator ∂t X µ , is removed. The collective coordinates, with vertex operators
∂n X µ , remain in the spectrum because the normal derivative is even under Ω.
That is, in terms of its action on the X oscillators Ω has an additional −1 for
the m = 2, . . . , 9 directions, as compared to the action on the usual NN strings.
By superconformal symmetry this must extend to the fermions, so that on the
ground states Ω is no longer the identity but acts as R = eiπ(S1 +S2 +S3 +S4 ) .
This removes the left-moving 8c and leaves the right-moving 8s (or vice versa:
we have made an arbitrary choice in defining R).
The second modification is the inclusion of 1-9 strings, strings with one
end on the 1-brane and one on a 9-brane, the latter corresponding to the usual
SO(32) Chan-Paton factor. This is the case ν = 8 from section 4.2. The Ω
projection determines the 9-1 state in terms of the 1-9, but otherwise makes
no constraint. The zero point energy (98) is strictly positive so there are no
massless states in the NS sector. The R ground states are, as always, massless.
q This type of argument had been applied to NS solitons in the context of six-dimensional

string-string duality.63

46

There are two ground states, from the periodic ψ 0,1 oscillators,
|±; ii = (ψ00 ± ψ01 )|ii,

(114)

where i is the Chan-Paton index for the 9-brane end. One of the two states
|±; ii is removed by the GSO projection, and the G0 physical state condition on
the remaining state implies that these massless fermions are chiral on the onebrane. Spacetime supersymmetry can only be satisfied if they move oppositely
to the 1-1 fermions; at the world-sheet level this would have to follow from
a careful analysis of the OPE of the gravitino. The 1-9 strings, having one
9-brane Chan-Paton index, are vectors of SO(32).
Thus the world-sheet theory of the Type I one-brane is precisely that of the
SO(32) heterotic string, with the spacetime supersymmetry realized in GreenSchwarz form and the current algebra in fermionic form.64 As in the IIB theory
we can now argue that this SO(32) heterotic string sets the lightest scale in
the theory when g becomes large, and so the natural assumption is that the
strongly coupled behavior is governed by the weakly coupled heterotic string.
This is in agreement with the conclusion from various other arguments.38,65
The fermionic SO(32) current algebra requires a GSO projection. It is
interesting to see how this arises in the D-string. Consider a closed D-string.
The Ω projection removed the U (1) gauge field, but is consistent with a discrete
gauge symmetry, a holonomy ±1 around the D-brane. This discrete gauge
symmetry is the GSO projection, and evidently the rules of D-branes require
us to sum over all consistent possibilities in this way. We can now see how Dstrings account for the spinor representation of SO(32) in the Type I theory. In
the R sector of the discrete D-brane gauge theory, the 1-9 strings are periodic.
The zero modes of the fields Ψi , representing the massless 1-9 strings, satisfy
the Clifford algebra
{Ψi0 , Ψj0 } = δ ij ,

i, j = 1, · · · , 32.

(115)

The quantization now proceeds just as for the fundamental heterotic string,
giving spinors 231 + 231 , one of which is removed by the discrete gauge symmetry.
5.2

The Eleventh Dimension

One of the greatest surprises in string duality was the discovery of a new
dimension, the eleventh. Let us see how we can find this dimension with the
aid of D-branes.
Type IIA:
47

In the IIA theory, the 0-brane has a mass τ0 = α′−1/2 g in the string
metric. As g → ∞, this mass is the lightest scale in the theory. In addition, we
have seen in the previous lecture that n 0-branes have a single supersymmetric
bound state with mass nτ0 . This evenly spaced tower of states is characteristic
of the appearance of an additional dimension, where the momentum (KaluzaKlein) states have masses n/R and form a continuum is R → ∞. The existence
of these states and of the eleventh dimension was inferred even before the
significance of D-branes was understood, because they are required by lowerdimensional U -dualities.37−38, r
To relate the coupling to the size of the eleventh dimension we need to
compare the respective actions,38
Z
Z
√
2πR
1
10 √
(116)
d x −gs Rs = 2
d10 x −g11 R11 .
2κ20 g 2
2κ11
The string and M theory metrics are equal up to a rescaling,
gsµν = ζ 2 g11µν

(117)

and so ζ 8 = 2πRκ20 g 2 /κ211 . The respective masses are related nR−1 = m11 =
ζms = nζτ0 or R = α′1/2 g/ζ. Combining these with the result (106) for κ0 ,
we obtain
i
h
−2/9
(118)
ζ = g 1/3 27/9 π 8/9 α′ κ11

and

i
h
2/9
R = g 2/3 2−7/9 π −8/9 κ11 .

(119)

In order to emphasize the basic structure we hide in braces numerical factors and factors of κ11 and α′ . The former we hope are correct; s the latter
are determined by dimensional analysis, with κ11 having units of (M theory
length9/2 ) and α′ (string theory length2 ). We are free to set ζ = 1, using the
same metric and units in M theory as in string theory. In this case
i
h
(120)
κ211 = g 3 27 π 8 α′9/2 .

The reason for not always doing so is that when we have a series of dualities,
as below, there will be different string metrics.
It is interesting to track the eleven-dimensional origin of the various branes
of the IIA theory. The D 0-branes are, as we have just seen, Kaluza-Klein
r In contrast,

the interpretation of the conifold singularity in terms of a massless soliton
requires that there not be bound states. This is a different problem, because the D-brane is
now wrapped on a curved space, and the required spectrum has been found.44
s See also.28

48

states. The F 1-branes, the IIA strings themselves, are wrapped membranes of
M-theory.66 The D 2-branes are membranes transverse to the eleventh dimension X 10 . The D 4-branes are M-theory 5-branes wrapped on X 10 , while the
NS (symmetric) 5-branes are M-theory 5-branes transverse to X 10 . The D 6branes, being the magnetic duals of the 0-branes, are Kaluza-Klein monopoles.
The D 8-branes are problematic, as there would seem to be no M-theory 8or 9-branes from which they can descend. The point is that the D 8-branes,
being sources of co-dimension one, cause the dilaton to diverge within a finite
distance.64 They must therefore be a finite distance from an orientifold plane,
which is essentially a boundary of spacetime. As the coupling grows, the distance to the divergence and the boundary necessarily shrinks, so that they
disappear into it in the strong coupling limit: they become part of the gauge
dynamics of the nine-dimensional boundary of M-theory,67 to be discussed in
more detail below.
One can see further indication of the eleventh dimension in the dynamics
of the D 2-brane. In 2 + 1 dimensions, the vector field on the brane is dual to
a scalar, through Hodge duality of the field strength, ∗F2 = dφ. This scalar
is the eleventh embedding dimension.68,56 Carrying out the duality in detail,
the D 2-brane action is found to have a hidden eleven-dimensional Lorentz
invariance!
E8 × E8 Heterotic String:
We have deduced the duals of four of the five ten-dimensional string theories. Let us study the final one, the E8 × E8 heterotic string, by using its
T -duality to the SO(32) string.69 Compactify on a large radius R and turn on
a Wilson line which breaks E8 × E8 to SO(16) × SO(16). This is T -dual to
the SO(32) heterotic string, again with a Wilson line breaking the group to
SO(16) × SO(16). The couplings and radii are related
R′
g′

= R−1 [α′ ] ,
i
h
1/2
.
= gR−1 α′

(121)

Now use Type I - heterotic duality to write this as a Type I theory with38
RI

=

gI

=

i
h
g ′−1/2 R′ = g −1/2 R−1/2 α′3/4 ,
i
h
−1/2
.
g ′−1 = g −1 R α′

(122)

The radius is very small, so it is useful to make another T -duality, to the ‘Type
I′ ’ theory. The compact dimension is then a segment of length πRI′ with eight
49

D 8-branes at each end, and
RI′
gI′

i
h
= RI−1 [α′ ] = g 1/2 R1/2 α′1/4 ,
i
h
i
h
1/2
= g −1/2 R3/2 2−1/2 α′−3/4 .
= gI RI−1 2−1/2 α′

(123)

Now take R → ∞ to recover the original ten-dimensional theory (in particular the Wilson line is irrelevant and the original E8 × E8 restored). Both
the radius and the coupling of the Type I′ theory become large. The physics
between the ends of the segment is given locally by the IIA string, and so the
strongly coupled limit is eleven-dimensional. Taking into account the transformations (117), (119), the radii of the two compact dimensions in M-theory
units are
i
h
2/9
2/3
(124)
2−11/18 π −8/9 κ11
R9 = ζI−1
′ RI′ = g
i
i
h
h
2/9
2/9
2/3
= g −1/3 R 2−10/9 π −8/9 α′−1/2 κ11 .
R10 = gI′ 2−7/9 π −8/9 κ11
As R → ∞, R10 → ∞ also, while R9 remains fixed and (for g large) large
compared to the Planck scale. Thus, in the strongly coupled limit of the tendimensional E8 × E8 heterotic string an eleventh dimension again appears, a
segment of length R9 , with one E8 factor on each endpoint.67
5.3

U -Duality

An interesting feature of string duality is the enlargement of the duality group
under further toroidal compactification. Understanding the origin of these U dualities, perhaps in some geometric way, might be a useful avenue to finding
the underlying structure in string theory. Here I would like to describe one
example, the Type II string on a five-torus. This is chosen because it is the setting for the simplest black hole state counting, and also because the necessary
group theory is somewhat familiar from grand unification.
Let us first count the gauge fields. From the NS-NS sector there are 5
Kaluza-Klein gauge bosons and 5 gauge bosons from the antisymmetric tensor.
There are 16 gauge bosons from the dimensional reduction of the various R-R
forms. Finally, one can form a field strength from the Hodge dual ∗H of the
3-form field strength of the NS-NS Bµν .
Let us see how T -duality acts on these. The T -duality is SO(5, 5; Z),
generated by T -dualities on the various axes, linear redefinitions of the axes,
and discrete shifts of the antisymmetric tensor. This mixes the first 10 NS-NS
gauge fields among themselves, and the 16 R-R gauge fields among themselves,
50

and leaves the final NS-NS field invariant. The SO(5, 5; Z) representations here
correspond directly to the 10, 16, and 1 of SO(10).
The low energy supergravity theory for this compactification has a continuous symmetry E6(6) which is a noncompact version of E6 .70 This is one of
those supergravity properties that was ignored for some time, because there
is no sign of it in (perturbative) string theory. But now we know better:36
a discrete subgroup E6(6) (Z) is supposed to be a good symmetry of the full
theory.
The gauge bosons are in the 27 of E6(6) (Z), which is the same as the 27 of
E6(6) . The decomposition under SO(10) ∼ SO(5, 5; Z) is familiar from grand
unified model building,
27 → 10 + 16 + 1 .

(125)

The excitations carrying the 10 charges are just the Kaluza-Klein and winding
strings. The U -duality requires also states in the 16. These are just the various
wrapped D-branes. Finally, the state carrying the 1 charge is an ordinary NSNS soliton, a symmetric 5-brane.71
U -Duality and Bound States:
It is interesting to see how some of the bound state results from the previous lecture fit the predictions of U -duality. We will generate U -transformations
as a combination of Tmn···p , which is a T -duality in the indicated directions,
and S, the IIB weak/strong transformation. The former switches between N
and D boundary conditions and between momentum and winding number in
the indicated directions. The latter interchanges the NS and R two-forms but
leaves the R four-form invariant, and acts correspondingly on the solitons carrying these charges. We denote by Dmn···p a D-brane extended in the indicated
directions, and similarly for Fm a fundamental string and pm a momentumcarrying BPS state.
The first duality chain is
T

T

S

78
(D789 , F9 ) → (D789 , D9 ) →9 (D78 , D∅ ) .
(D9 , F9 ) →

(126)

Thus the D-string–F-string bound state is U -dual to the 0-2 bound state.
The second chain is
T

S

(D6789 , D∅ ) →6 (D789 , D6 ) → (D789 , F6 )

T6789

→

S

(D6 , p6 ) → (F6 , p6 ) (127)

The bound states of n 0-branes and m 4-branes are thus U -dual to fundamental string states with momentum n and winding number m. The bound
state degeneracy (112) for m = 1 precisely matches the fundamental string
51

degeneracy.72,58−73 For m > 1 the same form (112) should hold but with
n → mn. This is believed to be the case, but the analysis (which requires the
instanton picture described in the next section) does not seem to be complete.73
A related issue is the question of branes ending on other branes.74 An Fstring can of course end on a D-string, so from the first duality chain it follows
that a D p-brane can end on a D (p + 2)-brane. The key issue is whether
the coupling between spacetime forms and world-brane fields allows the source
to be conserved, as with the NS-NS two-form source in figure 11. Similar
arguments can then be applied to the extended objects in M theory.74,56
5.4

D-Branes as Instantons

Consider now a 0-brane and n coincident 4-branes. The potential terms in the
action are
3
5
χ†i χi X
1 X † I 2
2
(χi τ χi ) .
(128)
(X
−
Y
)
+
a
a
(2πα′ )2 a=1
4g02
I=1

Here a runs over the dimensions transverse to the 4-brane, and Xa and Ya
are respectively the 0-brane and 4-brane positions. This is the same as in the
earlier action (103), except that we have taken the 4-branes to have infinite
volume so that their D-term drops out, and the 0-4 field χ now carries a 4brane index i indicated explicitly (in addition to the SU (2)R index which is
suppressed). The potential (128) is exact on grounds of N = 2 supersymmetry.
The first term is the N = 2 coupling between the hypermultiplets χ and the
vector multiplet scalars X, Y , while the second is the U (1) D-term.
For N > 1 there are two branches of moduli space,
Coulomb branch:

X 6= Y,

Higgs branch:

X = Y,

χ=0
χ 6= 0.

(129)

The Coulomb moduli space is just position space for the 0-brane. On the Higgs
branch on the other hand, the 0-brane has gotten stuck on the 4-branes. In
fact, it has dissolved into gauge fields, just as in the bound state discussions
from the previous lecture. The R-R couplings include a term C(1) Tr(F 2 ), so
that when there is an instanton on the 4-brane it carries the 0-brane charge.
One can also check this from the dimension of moduli space. There are 4N
real degrees of freedom in χ. The vanishing of the U (1) D-term imposes three
constraints, and modding by the (broken) U (1) removes another degree of
freedom leaving 4N − 4. In addition there are the 4 moduli for the position of
the 0-brane in the directions parallel to the 4-branes, for a total of 4N moduli.
52

This is the correct number for an SU (N ) instanton when we do not mod out
also the SU (N ) identifications. For k instantons this becomes 4N k.
The connection between D-branes and instantons was found first in the
case (p, p′ ) = (9, 5) by Witten.53 This is T -dual to the above but does not have
the Coulomb branch. That a p-brane instanton can shrink to zero size and
move off as a (p − 4)-brane was noted by Douglas.43
Note that this result has nothing to do with string duality, since the string
coupling can be held fixed and small. Rather, it is a conformal field theory
result. Starting from large instantons, it has always been a puzzle how to
understand instanton amplitudes when the size of the instanton drops below
the string scale. We now see, at least for instantons coupled to boundary
(Chan-Paton) gauge fields, that there is a simple expansion around the zerosize limit.
5.5

D-Branes as Probes

In the preceding section we interpreted the 0-4 strings χ as moduli for the size
and orientation of an instanton obtained as a blown-up D-brane. In a very
interesting paper, Douglas has shown that one can see the resulting instanton
by using another D-brane as a probe.75 First take a T -dual so that the gauge
fields live on 9-branes and the instanton is a 5-brane; then add a 1-brane as a
probe. When the 1-brane is close to the 5-brane, closer than the string scale,
the dynamics is dominated by the light open strings, especially the short 1-5
strings. Integrating out the light open strings to find the effective gauge field
seen by the probe, one recovers Witten’s lagrangian version of the ADMH
construction and so the instanton gauge field.76,77 In particular, the variety
of fields in that construction arise as the various p-p′ strings of the D-brane
system.
Thus it seems that one can sensibly discuss an instanton smaller than the
string scale. This is in conflict with the idea that the string length is a minimum
distance. Indeed, there were arguments to this effect made by Shenker,78 and
there have been recent studies of D-brane scattering suggesting that D-branes
do indeed probe a shorter length scale.24,79 This should be covered in detail in
Steve’s lectures. There have been many other interesting recent applications
of this idea, in particular by Seiberg, but I will not have time to pursue this.
I will sketch a different example of the D-brane as probe,80 similar in nature
to the instanton but simpler in its field content. This is the blowing up of a Z2
fixed point. It is known that twisted-sector moduli have the interpretation of
smoothing out the orbifold geometry. With a D-brane probe this can be seen
directly.
53

Consider the R6 × (R4 /Z2 ) orbifold formed by the reflection R, X 6,7,8,9 →
−X
, in the IIB theory. We are focusing on the neighborhood of a single
fixed point. Add a D-string in this plane at X 2,...,9 = 0. In order for the string
to be able to move off the fixed plane it needs two Chan-Paton indices, for the
string and its Z2 image. Since R takes the D-string into its image, it acts on
an open string state as
6,7,8,9

1
′ ′ 1
R|ψ, iji = σii
′ |Rψ, i j iσj ′ j .

(130)

That is, it acts on the oscillators in the usual way and also switches the ChanPaton factors for the brane and its image. This is a simple example of the
general formalism for orbifolds and orientifolds with D-branes.54 In the NS
sector, the massless R-invariant states are then
∂t X µ σ 0,1 ,
∂n X i σ 0,1 ,

µ = 0, 1
i = 2, 3, 4, 5

∂n X m σ 2,3 ,

m = 6, 7, 8, 9.

(131)

These are respectively a gauge field, the position of the string within the
six-plane, and the transverse position. Call the corresponding D-string fields
Aµ , xi , xm , all 2 × 2 matrices. The bosonic action is the d = 10 U (2) YangMills action, dimensionally reduced and R-projected (which breaks the gauge
symmetry to U (1) × U (1)). In particular, the potential is
X
X
U =2
Tr([xi , xm ]2 ) +
Tr([xm , xn ]2 ).
(132)
m,n

i,m

The moduli space thus has two branches. On one, xm = 0 and xi = ui σ 0 +v i σ 1 .
This corresponds to two D-strings moving independently in the plane, with
positions ui ± v i . The gauge symmetry is unbroken, giving independent U (1)’s
on each D-string. On the other branch, xm is nonzero and xi = ui σ 0 . The
σ 1 gauge invariance is broken and so by gauge choice xm = wm σ 3 . This
corresponds to the D-string moving off the fixed plane, the string and its image
being at (ui , ±wm ).
Now let us turn on twisted-sector moduli. Define complex q m by xm =
3
σ Re(q m ) + σ 2 Im(q m ), and define two doublets,
 6

 6

q + iq 7
q̄ + iq̄ 7
Φ0 =
,
Φ1 =
.
(133)
q 8 + iq 9
q̄ 8 + iq̄ 9
These have charges ±1 respectively under the σ 1 U (1). The three NSNS moduli
can be written as a vector D, and the potential is proportional to
(Φ†0 τ Φ0 − Φ†1 τ Φ1 + D)2 ,
54

(134)

where the Pauli matrices are now denoted τ I to emphasize that they act in a
different space. This reduces to the second term of the earlier potential (128)
when D = 0. Its form is determined by supersymmetry.
For D 6= 0 the orbifold point is blown up. The moduli space of the D-string
is simply the set of possible locations, that is, the blown up ALE space.t The
z m contain eight scalar fields. Three are removed by the D-flatness condition
that the potential vanish, and a fourth is a gauge degree of freedom, leaving the
expected four moduli. In terms of supermultiplets, the system has the equivalent of d = 6 N = 1 supersymmetry. The D-string has two hypermultiplets
and two vector multiplets, which are Higgsed down to one hypermultiplet and
one vector multiplet. The idea of Douglas75 is that the metric on this moduli space, as seen in the kinetic term for the D-string fields, should be the
smoothed orbifold metric. It is straightforward to verify this, and we omit
the details.80 The result is the Eguchi-Hanson metric,81 which is the correct
(hyper-Kähler) metric on the blown-up orbifold. This construction is known
as the hyper-Kähler quotient.82 This geometry seems to make sense even when
its scale is far shorter than the string scale. This has recently been extended
to other orbifolds.83
5.6

D-Branes as Black Holes

Before the significance of D-branes was recognized, the R-R charged objects
required by string duality were believed to be black p-branes.36−39 Such solutions exist for any tensor gauge charge,35 with the source essentially hidden
in the singularity. It is interesting to consider the relation between these two
kinds of object.
Consider the action for the metric, an NS-NS field strength, and an R-R
field strength, schematically
Z

S = dD x e−2φ R − e−2φ H 2 − G2 .
(135)

For a black hole (or more generally p-brane) carrying NS-NS charge, the solution is determined by the balance between the first two terms. Since the dilaton
appears in the same way in both terms, the classical solution is independent of
the dilaton. That is, its size is independent of the string coupling and its mass
scales as the action, e−2φ = g −2 . For a black p-brane carrying R-R charge, the
solution is determined by a balance between the first and third terms. Its mass
is then the mean, e−φ = g −1 , smaller at weak coupling than that of the NS-NS
object. Similarly, one can see by a scaling argument that the size goes to zero
t Note that the branch of the moduli space with v i 6= 0 is no longer present.

55

with the string coupling. For couplings less than one, the classical solution is
smaller than the string scale. At this point one’s prejudice from perturbative
string theory is that geometry, or at least the low energy effective action we
are using, makes no sense and the black solution is not relevant. Instead, as
with the earlier example of instantons, for solitons smaller than the string scale
D-branes provide the correct effective description.
One rather prosaic scenario for what all this means is that string theory
really can be defined as some closed string field theory, and the D-branes
are just solitons of this theory. The low energy action (135) is not valid for
these solitons, but the full closed string action would correctly describe the
D-branes. My own prejudice84 is that string field theory is not likely to be a
useful description beyond perturbation theory. String duality has reinforced
this, in that each string theory appears to be an effective theory with a very
specific range of validity.
It is interesting to consider now the case of Q D-branes. Each boundary
on the string world-sheet then brings in a factor of gQ, so the condition for
validity of the D-brane approximation is now gQ < 1. At the same time, one
finds that the Schwarzchild radius in string units is also gQ, so the low energy
geometric description should be valid for gQ > 1.
Using a standard strategy in string duality we can continue in g and the
number of supersymmetric (BPS) states must be invariant. Strominger and
Vafa applied this to a collection of D-branes chosen in such a way that the
resulting black hole would have a nonzero area horizon, finding that the density
of states in the D-brane system corresponded precisely to that given by the
black hole entropy.85 Because of the close analogy between black hole mechanics
and thermodynamics, there have been many attempts to give a statistical
mechanical interpretation to the black hole entropy, but this is the first time
that it has been done in a controlled way.u
This has of course led to a great surge of interest. Unfortunately this is
beyond the scope of these lectures, but I should at least discuss in brief the
implications for the black hole information paradox. At a superficial level there
are none: the success of the state counting might be expected regardless. We
have two descriptions with different ranges of validity, and while the D-brane
system has an explicit quantum mechanical description, one could certainly
imagine that at gQ ∼ 1 the system makes a transition from being described to
high accuracy by ordinary quantum mechanics to one with information loss.
Nevertheless, it is worth pushing things further and asking whether we can
u Larsen and Wilczek86

had applied the same strategy to an NS black hole, but here the
system remains a black hole even at weak coupling and so there is no explicit understanding
of the space of states.

56

say more about black hole quantum mechanics from D-branes. Indeed, there
are some successes that seem to go beyond what supersymmetry alone would
require. These include v counting of states of some nonextremal black holes87
and comparisons of the decay rates of black holes and D-branes88 even at a
fairly high level of detail.89 Yet, even while there is some indication that black
holes might be described by ordinary quantum mechanics, it is important to
remember that there is a paradox here. Twenty years of attempts to show that
information is preserved in black hole evaporation have only served to point
up that if it is so it will imply a significant change in our way of thinking about
spacetime. Enthusiasts of D-brane–black hole quantum mechanics should keep
their eyes open for the important lesson.
5.7

Conclusion

The Theory of Everything—string theory, M-theory, whatever it should eventually be called—is now understood as in figure 13. The various string theories
are asymptotic expansions around the cusps. In addition, supergravity provides an effective description valid in the whole picture but only at low energy,
and one can follow the BPS states from one limit to another.
This is far from a nonperturbative definition of the theory. I have no
doubt that such a definition is possible, and that (as with the renormalization
group in quantum field theory) it is a necessary step towards understanding the
dynamics of the theory. Where do D-branes fit in? At a superficial level, they
merely provide, in the Type I and Type II limits, a more precise description
of the R-R solitons in the spectrum. Yet it may be that in fact they are closer
than strings to being the fundamental degrees of freedom needed to define the
whole picture. The fact that they probe shorter distance scales79 and perhaps
the unexpected successes of D-brane–black hole quantum mechanics described
above suggest that this may be so. Thus, the D-brane Hamiltonian, or some
structure abstracted from it, may have a much greater range of validity than
the perturbative string theory in which it was first described.90
Acknowledgments
I would like to thank Shyamoli Chaudhuri and Clifford Johnson for their collaboration on the earlier version of these notes, and Shyamoli for her careful
reading of the manuscript. I would also like to thank Martin Rocek and the
other members of the Stony Brook D-Brane Reading Group for their detailed
v I apologize in advance for identifying only a small number of papers out of a large literature,

but these seem to have been highlights at least in a certain direction of development.

57

M - theory

Type IIA

SO(32) heterotic

E8x E8 heterotic

Type IIB

Type I
Figure 13: All string theories, and M-theory, as limits of one theory. Energy, or more
generally distance from the BPS limit, increases vertically.

comments and suggestions. This work is supported by NSF grants PHY9116964 and PHY94-07194.
References
1. J. Dai, R. G. Leigh and J. Polchinski, Mod. Phys. Lett. A4 (1989) 2073.
2. J. Polchinski, Phys. Rev. Lett. 75 (1995) 4724.
3. J. Polchinski, S. Chaudhuri, and C. Johnson, Notes on D-Branes,
preprint NSF-ITP-96-003, hep-th/9602052.
4. A. Chodos and C. B. Thorn, Nucl. Phys. B72 (1974) 509;
W. Siegel, Nucl. Phys. B109 (1976) 244;
S. M. Roy and V. Singh, Pramana 26 (1986) L85; Phys. Rev. D35
(1987) 1939.
5. J. A. Harvey and J. A. Minahan, Phys. Lett. B188 (1987) 44.
6. N. Ishibashi and T. Onogi, Nucl. Phys. B318 (1989) 239;
G. Pradisi and A. Sagnotti, Phys. Lett. B216 (1989) 59;
A. Sagnotti, Phys. Rept. 184 (1989) 167;
58

P. Horava, Nucl. Phys. B327 (1989) 461.
7. P. Horava, Phys. Lett. B231 (1989) 251.
8. M. B. Green, Phys. Lett. B266 (1991) 325.
9. J. H. Schwarz, Nucl. Phys. B65 (1973), 131;
E. F. Corrigan and D. B. Fairlie, Nucl. Phys. B91 (1975) 527;
M. B. Green, Nucl. Phys. B103 (1976) 333;
M. B. Green and J. A. Shapiro, Phys. Lett. 64B (1976) 454;
A. Cohen, G. Moore, P. Nelson, and J. Polchinski, Nucl. Phys. B267,
143 (1986); B281, 127 (1987).
10. M. B. Green, Phys. Lett. B69 (1977) 89; B201 (1988) 42; B282 (1992)
380.
11. J. Polchinski, Phys. Rev. D50 (1994) 6041.
12. S. H. Shenker, in Cargese 1990, Proceedings: Random Surfaces and
Quantum Gravity (1990) 191.
13. M. B. Green, Phys. Lett. B329 (1994) 435.
14. J. Paton and Chan Hong-Mo, Nucl. Phys. B10 (1969) 519.
15. J. H. Schwarz, in Florence 1982, Proceedings, Lattice Gauge Theory,
Supersymmetry and Grand Unification, 233; Phys. Rept. 89 (1982) 223;
N. Marcus and A. Sagnotti, Phys. Lett. 119B (1982) 97.
16. A. Sagnotti, Non-Perturbative Quantum Field Theory, eds. G. Mack et.
al. (Pergamon Press, 1988) 521;
V. Periwal, unpublished;
J. Govaerts, Phys. Lett. B220 (1989) 77.
17. A. Strominger , S.-T. Yau, and E. Zaslow, Mirror Symmetry is T -Duality,
hep-th/9606040;
H. Ooguri, Y. Oz, and Z. Yin, Nucl. Phys. B477 (1996) 407, hepth/9606112.
18. K. Kikkawa and M. Yamanaka, Phys. Lett. B149 (1984) 357;
N. Sakai and I. Senda, Prog. Theor. Phys. 75 (1986) 692.
19. V.P. Nair, A. Shapere, A. Strominger, and F. Wilczek, Nucl. Phys.
B287 (1987) 402.
20. M. Dine, P. Huet, and N. Seiberg, Nucl. Phys. B322 (1989) 301.
21. P. Ginsparg and C. Vafa, Nucl. Phys. B289 (1987) 414;
T. H. Buscher, Phys. Lett. B194B (1987) 59; B201 (1988) 466.
22. E. Witten, Nucl. Phys. B460 (1996) 335, hep-th/9510135.
23. R. G. Leigh, Mod. Phys. Lett. A4 (1989) 2767.
24. C. Bachas, Phys. Lett. B374 (1996) 37, hep-th/9511043.
25. E. Bergshoeff, M. de Roo, M. B. Green, G. Papadopoulos, and P.K.
Townsend, Nucl. Phys. B470 (1996) 113, hep-th/9601150;
E. Alvarez, J. L. F. Barbon, and J. Borlaf, T -Duality for Open Strings,
59

hep-th/9603089;
E. Bergshoeff and M. De Roo, Phys. Lett. B380 (1996) 265, hepth/9603123.
26. E. S. Fradkin and A. A. Tseytlin, Phys. Lett. B163 (1985) 123.
27. M. B. Green, C. M. Hull, and P. K. Townsend, Phys. Lett. B382 (1996)
65, hep-th/9604119.
28. S.P. de Alwis, A Note on Brane Tension and M Theory, hep-th/9607011.
29. C. Lovelace, Phys. Lett. B34 (1971) 500;
L. Clavelli and J. Shapiro, Nucl. Phys. B57 (1973) 490;
M. Ademollo, R. D’ Auria, F. Gliozzi, E. Napolitano, S. Sciuto, and P.
di Vecchia, Nucl. Phys. B94 (1975) 221;
C. G. Callan, C. Lovelace, C. R. Nappi, and S. A. Yost, Nucl. Phys.
B293 (1987) 83.
30. J. Polchinski and Y. Cai, Nucl. Phys. B296 (1988) 91;
C. G. Callan, C. Lovelace, C. R. Nappi and S.A. Yost, Nucl. Phys. B308
(1988) 221.
31. S. Coleman and E. Weinberg, Phys. Rev. D7 (1973) 1888;
J. Polchinski, Comm. Math. Phys. 104 (1986) 37.
32. J. A. Shapiro and C. B. Thorn, Phys. Rev. D36 (1987) 432;
J. Dai and J. Polchinski, Phys. Lett. B220 (1989) 387.
33. M. Douglas and B. Grinstein, Phys. Lett. B183 (1987) 552; (E) 187
(1987) 442;
S. Weinberg, Phys. Lett. B187 (1987) 278;
N. Marcus and A. Sagnotti, Phys. Lett. B188 (1987) 58.
34. D. Friedan, E. Martinec, and S. Shenker, Nucl. Phys. B271 (1986) 93.
35. G. T. Horowitz and A. Strominger, Nucl. Phys. B360 (1991) 197.
36. C. M. Hull and P.K. Townsend, Nucl. Phys. B438 (1995) 109.
37. P. K. Townsend, Phys. Lett. B350 (1995) 184, hep-th/9501068.
38. E. Witten, Nucl. Phys. B443 (1995) 85.
39. A. Strominger, Nucl. Phys. B451 (1995) 96.
40. L. J. Romans, Phys. Lett. B169 (1986) 374.
41. J. Polchinski and A. Strominger, New Vacua for Type II String Theory,
hep-th/9510227.
42. M. Li, Nucl. Phys. B460 (1996) 351, hep-th/9510161.
43. M. R. Douglas, Branes within Branes, hep-th/9512077.
44. M. Bershadsky, C. Vafa, and V. Sadov, Nucl. Phys. B463 (1996) 420,
hep-th/9511222.
45. M. B. Green, J. A. Harvey, and G. Moore, I-Brane Inflow and Anomalous
Couplings on D-Branes, hep-th/9605033.
46. M. Bianchi, G. Pradisi, and A. Sagnotti, Nucl. Phys. B376 (1992) 365.
60

47. T. Banks and L. Susskind, Brane - Anti-Brane Forces, hep-th/9511194.
48. W. Fischler and L. Susskind, Phys. Lett. B171 (1986) 383; 173 (1986)
262.
49. M. B. Green and J. H. Schwarz, Phys. Lett. B149 (1984) 117; B151
(1985) 21.
50. S. Weinberg, The Quantum Theory of Fields. Vol. 1: Foundations,
(Cambridge U. P., Cambridge UK, 1995).
51. R. I. Nepomechie, Phys. Rev. D31 (1985) 1921;
C. Teitelboim, Phys. Lett. B167 (1986) 63, 69.
52. M. Berkooz, M. R. Douglas, and R. G. Leigh, Branes Intersecting at
Angles, hep-th/9606139.
53. E. Witten, Nucl. Phys. B460 (1996) 541, hep-th/9511030.
54. E. G. Gimon and Joseph Polchinski, Phys. Rev. D54 (1996) 1667,
hep-th/9601038.
55. J. H. Schwarz, Phys. Lett. B360 (1995) 13; (E) B364 (1995) 252.
56. P .K. Townsend, Phys. Lett. B373 (1996) 68, hep-th/9512062.
57. A. Sen, Phys. Rev. D54 (1996) 2964.
58. A. Sen, Phys. Rev. D53 (1996) 2874.
59. C. Vafa, Nucl. Phys. B463 (1996) 415, hep-th/9511088.
60. G. Horowitz, private communication.
61. G. Papadopoulos and P. K. Townsend, Kaluza-Klein on the Brane, hepth/9609095;
U. H. Danielsson and G. Ferretti, The Heterotic Life of the D-particle,
hep-th/9610082.
62. C. M. Hull, Nucl. Phys. B468 (1996) 113, hep-th/9512181.
63. J. A. Harvey and A. Strominger, Nucl. Phys. B449 (1995) 535;
A. Sen, Nucl. Phys. B450 (1995) 103.
64. J. Polchinski and E. Witten, Nucl. Phys. B460 (1996) 525, hepth/9510169.
65. A. Dabholkar, Phys. Lett. B357 (1995) 307;
C. M. Hull, Phys. Lett. B357 (1995) 545.
66. E. Bergshoeff, M. J. Duff, C. N. Pope, and E. Sezgin, Phys. Lett. B224
(1989) 71.
67. P. Horava and E. Witten, Nucl. Phys. B460 (1996) 506, hep-th/9510209.
68. M. J. Duff and J. X. Lu, Nucl. Phys. B390 (1993) 276, hep-th/9207060;
C. Schmidhuber, Nucl .Phys. B467 (1996) 146, hep-th/9601003;
S. P. de Alwis and K. Sato, Phys. Rev. D53 (1996) 7187, hepth/9601167;
A. A. Tseytlin, Nucl. Phys. B469 (1996) 51, hep-th/9602064.
69. K. S. Narain, Phys. Lett. 169B (1986) 41;
61

P. Ginsparg, Phys. Rev. D35 (1987) 648.
70. B. Julia, in Supergravity and Superspace, ed. by S. W. Hawking and M.
Rocek (Cambridge U. P., Cambridge UK, 1981).
71. C. G. Callan, J. A. Harvey, and A. Strominger, Nucl. Phys. B359 (1991)
611; B367 (1991) 60.
72. C. Vafa and E. Witten, Nucl. Phys. B431 (1994) 3, hep-th/9408074.
73. C. Vafa, Nucl. Phys. B463 (1996) 435, hep-th/9512078.
74. A. Strominger, Phys. Lett. B383 (1996) 44, hep-th/9512059.
75. M. Douglas, Gauge Fields and D-Branes, hep-th/9604198;
M. R. Douglas and G. Moore, D-Branes, Quivers, and ALE Instantons,
hep-th/9603167.
76. E. Witten, J. Geom. Phys. 15 (1995) 215, hep-th/9410052.
77. M. F. Atiyah, V. G. Drinfeld, N. J. Hitchin, and Y. I. Manin, Phys. Lett.
A65 (1978) 185.
78. S. H. Shenker, Another Length Scale in String Theory? preprint RU-9553, hep-th/9509132 and seminar at ITP, Jan. 1996.
79. D. Kabat and P. Pouliot, A Comment on Zero-Brane Quantum Mechanics, hep-th/9603127;
U. H. Danielsson, G. Ferretti, and B. Sundborg, D-Particle Dynamics
and Bound States, hep-th/9603081;
G. Lifschytz, Comparing D-branes to Black-branes, hep-th/9604156;
M. R. Douglas, D. Kabat, P. Pouliot and S. H. Shenker, D-branes and
Short Distances in String Theory, hep-th/9608024.
80. J. Polchinski, Tensors from K3 Orientifolds, hep-th/9606165.
81. T. Eguchi and A. J. Hanson, Ann. Phys. 120 (1979) 82;
G. W. Gibbons and S. W. Hawking, Comm. Math. Phys. 66 (1979)
291.
82. A. Hitchin, A. Karlhede, U. Lindstrom, and M. Roček, Comm. Math.
Phys. 108 (1987) 535;
P. Kronheimer, J. Diff. Geom. 28 (1989) 665; 29 (1989) 685.
83. C. V. Johnson and R. C. Myers, Aspects of Type IIB Theory on ALE
Spaces, hep-th/9610140.
84. J. Polchinski, “What is String Theory?,” Proceedings of the 1994 Les
Houches Summer School, edited by F. David, P. Ginsparg and J. ZinnJustin (Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1996) p. 287, hep-th/9411028.
85. A. Strominger and C. Vafa, Microscopic Origin of the BekensteinHawking Entropy, hep-th/9601029.
86. F. Larsen and F. Wilczek, Phys. Lett. B375 (1996) 37.
87. C. G. Callan, Jr. and J. M. Maldacena, Nucl. Phys. B472 (1996) 591,
hep-th/9602043;
62

G. T. Horowitz and A. Strominger, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77 (1996) 2368,
hep-th/9602051;
G. T. Horowitz, J. M. Maldacena, and Andrew Strominger, Phys. Lett.
B383 (1996) 151, hep-th/9603109;
J. M. Maldacena, Black Holes in String Theory, Ph. D. Thesis, hepth/9607235.
88. A. Dhar, G. Mandal and S. R. Wadia, Phys. Lett. B388 (1996) 51,
hep-th/9605234;
S. R. Das and Samir D. Mathur, Comparing Decay Rates for Black Holes
and D-Branes, hep-th/9606185;
S. R. Das and S. D. Mathur, Interactions Involving D-Branes, hepth/9607149.
89. J. Maldacena and A. Strominger, Black Hole Grey Body Factors and DBrane Spectroscopy, hep-th/9609026;
C. G. Callan, Jr., S. S. Gubser, I. R. Klebanov, and A. A. Tseytlin,
Absorption of Fixed Scalars and the D-Brane Approach to Black Holes,
hep-th/9610172.
90. T. Banks, W. Fischler, S. H. Shenker, and L. Susskind, M Theory as a
Matrix Model: A Conjecture, hep-th/9610043.

63

