hep-th/9606122, HUTP-96/A025, IASSNS 96/60

arXiv:hep-th/9606122v1 19 Jun 1996

Constraints on Low-Dimensional String Compactifications
S. Sethi∗ and C. Vafa
Lyman Laboratory of Physics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
and
E. Witten†
School of Natural Sciences
Institute for Advanced Study
Olden Lane, Princeton, NJ 08540, USA

We study the restrictions imposed by cancellation of the tadpoles for two, three, and
four-form gauge fields in string theory, M-theory and F-theory compactified to two, three
and four dimensions, respectively. For a large class of supersymmetric vacua, turning on
a sufficient number of strings, membranes and three-branes, respectively, can cancel the
tadpoles, and preserve supersymmetry. However, there are cases where the tadpole cannot
be removed in this way, either because the tadpole is fractional, or because of its sign. For
M-theory and F-theory compactifications, we also explore the relation of the membranes
and three-branes to the nonperturbative space-time superpotential.

6/96
∗

Supported in part by the Fannie and John Hertz Foundation (sethi@string.harvard.edu).

†

Supported in part by NSF Grant PHY95-13835.

1. Introduction
String theory compactifications below four dimensions have not been explored very
thoroughly. This is partly because compactifications below four dimensions do not at
first sight appear relevant to the observed four-dimensional universe. However, the picture has changed with recent developments [1] that show that certain four-dimensional
compactifications of F-theory are related to Type IIA and M-theory compactifications below four dimensions. Compactifications below four dimensions may also be relevant to
certain four-dimensional questions such as the vanishing of the cosmological constant [2].
Finally, given that the string world-sheet is itself two-dimensional, one naturally expects
that some new interesting phenomena should occur upon compactification of string theory
to two dimensions, or likewise of M-theory to three dimensions, or of F-theory to four
dimensions.
In this paper, we begin to explore some aspects of these compactifications. In testing
one of the predictions of string-string duality, it was shown in [3] that there is a one-loop
interaction in Type IIA superstring theory of the form,
Z
δS = − B ∧ X8 (R),

(1.1)

where B is the NS-NS two-form of Type IIA which couples to the string, and X8 (R) is an
eight-form constructed as a quartic polynomial in the curvature. In particular, this implies
that compactification on an eight-dimensional manifold N with
Z
I=−
X8 6= 0,

(1.2)

N

results in a one-point function for the B field of the effective two-dimensional theory,
destabilizing the vacuum. Given the relation between M-theory and Type IIA, this implies
[4] that there is a similar term in the effective action of M-theory where B is replaced by the
three-form C which couples to the membrane. The role of this term in M-theory has been
discussed recently [7]. Similarly, given the relation between F-theory compactifications
and M-theory [1], it follows that there is a similar term in the effective action of F-theory
where C is replaced by A, the four-form potential which couples to the F-theory threebrane. Note that since three-branes are the only branes in Type IIB invariant under
SL(2, Z), they play roughly the same role in F-theory that membranes play in M-theory,
or strings in string theory [8,9].
1

To cancel the tadpoles present in these compactifications, we include in the vacuum I
strings, membranes, and three-branes in Type IIA, M-theory, and F-theory, respectively,
where I is defined in (1.2). The world-volumes of these strings, membranes, or threebranes are located at particular points on N , but stretch across the uncompactified space
Rn (where n = 2, 3, or 4 in the three cases), thus preserving the n-dimensional Poincaré
invariance. Some examples of this kind have been considered recently in [10,11]. There
are two possible obstructions to canceling the tadpole in this way. One is that I may
be fractional. Since branes only carry integer units of charge, there is no way to cancel
the tadpole by including branes unless I is an integer. A more subtle obstruction is
that I might be integral but negative. In this case, canceling the tadpole requires antibranes rather than branes. This does give a consistent tadpole-free vacuum, but without
supersymmetry. The reason that anti-branes violate supersymmetry is that, first of all,
compactification on the eight-manifold N only preserves supersymmetries that have a
definite eight-dimensional chirality (to be precise, some but not all supersymmetries of
the preferred chirality are preserved in compactification on N ). Likewise, inclusion of
a brane or anti-brane that stretches across Rn at a particular point in N preserves the
supersymmetries of a definite eight-dimensional chirality. By definition, by “branes” we
mean the objects that preserve the supersymmetries of the same chirality as those preserved
in compactification on N ; inclusion of anti-branes in compactification on N therefore
completely breaks the supersymmetry. To summarize, then, the tadpoles can be canceled
in a supersymmetric fashion by inclusion of branes if and only if I is a positive integer.
For Type IIA compactifications on a Calabi-Yau four-manifold X, I is proportional
to the topological Euler characteristic, χ, of N . To see this, note that in the computation
performed in [3], one ended up integrating the elliptic genus, defined by taking the odd spin
structure for left-movers and the sum of all even spin structures for the right-movers, over
the moduli space of elliptic curves. For compactifications with space-time supersymmetry,
the sum over all even spin structures gives the same result as the odd spin structure. Thus,
the net effect is to get a term proportional to the path integral with the odd spin structure for both left- and right-movers, which equals the world-sheet supersymmetric index
Tr(−1)F for this theory; for geometrical vacua, this is given by the Euler characteristic χ
of N . The proportionality constant was fixed in [3], and is such that
I=
2

χ
.
24

In the following section, we derive some topological constraints on the values of χ/24
for compactifications on Calabi-Yau four-folds. We shall also explore some examples of
Type IIA compactifications where χ is negative. The case of K3 × K3 is considered as
an example of an F-theory compactification with N=2 supersymmetry requiring twentyfour branes, but also admitting a dual realization as an F-theory compactification on
the product of a Calabi-Yau three-fold with a T2 . We conclude in section three with a
discussion of the relation of these branes to the non-perturbatively generated space-time
superpotential.

2. Topological Constraints
2.1. Calabi-Yau Four-fold Compactifications
We begin by considering a general Calabi-Yau four-fold, N . On such a space, we can
compactify Type IIA, M-theory, or (if N is elliptically fibered) F-theory to two, three, or
four dimensions. While the formula I = χ/24 makes it appear that the obstruction to
cancelling the anomaly by turning on branes resides generally in Z24 , in actuality we will
show that the Euler characteristic of a Calabi-Yau four-fold is always divisible by six, so
the obstruction takes values in Z4 .
To show that the Euler characteristic is always divisible by six, we will use index
theory. The index of the Dolbeault operator ∂¯E acting on anti-holomorphic forms with
p

values in the bundle Ep of holomorphic (p, 0)-forms is given by
Ind(∂¯Ep ) =

n=4
X

(−1)q hp,q ,

q=0

where hp,q denotes the dimension of the cohomology group H p,q (N ). This index is the
twisted arithmetic genus, which can be expressed in terms of characteristic classes using
the Atiyah-Singer index theorem:
Ind(∂¯Ep ) =

Z

Td(N )ch(Ωp,0 ),

(2.1)

N

where Ωp,q is the bundle of complex-valued (p, q)-forms on N , Td is the Todd class, and ch
is the Chern character. Since c1 = 0, all toplogical indices for the four-fold can be expressed
R
in terms of the Chern classes c4 and c22 , where N c4 = χ is the Euler characteristic. We
3

begin by considering the untwisted arithmetic genus, corresponding to p = 0 in (2.1). The
Todd genus for a Calabi-Yau four-fold is given by,
Td(N ) =

1
(3c2 − c4 ).
720 2

This must be two for a Calabi-Yau four-fold, and therefore,
Z
χ
c22 = 480 + .
3
N
To complete the argument, we only have to consider the case p = 1. The index in this case
is given by

1
Ind(∂¯E1 ) =
180

Z

N


χ
3c22 − 31c4 = 8 − .
6

The integrality of this index thus implies that χ is divisible by 6. In the remaining case
with p = 2, the index,
1
Ind(∂¯E2 ) =
120

Z

N


2
3c22 + 79c4 = 12 + χ,
3

while further constraining the Hodge numbers, does not provide any new information about
the divisibility of χ.
Can we hope for a stronger restriction? It is easy to construct an example that shows
that the Euler characteristic of a Calabi-Yau four-fold, while divisible by six, need not
be divisible by 12. Consider a Calabi-Yau hypersurface in P5 defined by a homogeneous
polynomial of degree six. A straightforward application of the adjunction formula gives
3
an Euler characteristic of 2610 for this space, and so I = 2610
24 = 108 4 ; therefore, the

obstruction to cancelling the tadpole is non-trivial, and takes values in Z4 . It is easy to
construct other examples of spaces with anomalies that cannot be canceled in a simple
way by turning on branes.
2.2. The Elliptically-Fibered Case
A particular class of Calabi-Yau four-folds N is of special interest, namely, those
admitting elliptic fibrations with a section. Saying that N admits an elliptic fibration
means simply that there is a holomorphic projection π : N → B, whose generic fiber is an
elliptic curve; here B is a complex three-fold, which except in rather special cases has c1
at least generically positive.
4

Such N ’s can be used to compactify F-theory to four dimensions [1]. Equivalently,
we can view such an F-theory compactification as a Type IIB compactification on B, with
seven-branes, in which the modulus of the elliptic fibration describes the variation of the
dilaton and axion fields along B. From that point of view, the class dual to 12c1 (B) can
be identified with the class where the 7-brane lives [12]. We can now attempt to rewrite
I = χ/24 in terms of properties of B alone. This turns out to be possible if the elliptically
fibered manifold over B is non-singular.
Before entering into a precise computation, let us note that I will vanish if c1 (B) = 0.
Indeed, in that case, B is a Calabi-Yau three-fold, and the four-fold N is just N = B ×
T2 , whose Euler characteristic vanishes. For this reason, one should expect χ(N ) to be
proportional to c1 (B). If one assumes that χ can be written in terms of Chern classes of
B, so that

1
χ(N ) =
I=
24

Z

αc1 c2 + βc31
B



(2.2)

(we omit a c3 term since it would not vanish when c1 (B) = 0), then the coefficients
can be determined by considering some simple examples. For N = K3 × K3 we have
R
R
χ(N )/24 = 24. In this case, the base is B = K3 × P1 , for which c1 3 = 0, c1 c2 = 48,

so α = 12 . For another example, by considering an elliptically fibered Calabi-Yau over P3 ,
for which χ/24 = 972, one gets β = 15. The formula for I is thus

Z 
1
3
I=
15c1 + c1 c2 .
2
B

(2.3)

Note further that if the holonomy of N is SU (4), rather than a subgroup, then
by a standard vanishing theorem, there are no holomorphic differential forms on N except a constant zero-form and the Calabi-Yau four-form. There must likewise be no
non-constant holomorphic differentials on B (as a holomorphic differential on B would
pull back to a holomorphic differential on N ). The arithmetic genus of B (that is,
P3
i
i,0
i=0 (−1) dim H (B)) is therefore equal to one. But the arithmetic genus of a threeR
fold is B c1 c2 /24, so for this class of N ’s we can write
I = 12 + 15

Z

c31 .

(2.4)

B

Since the integral in (2.4) is a positive integer, we see that for this class of N ’s, granted
that I can be written in terms of Chern classes, I is always a positive integer, so that
supersymmetric tadpole cancellation is always possible.
5

It remains, then, to verify that in fact I can be expressed in terms of Chern classes; in
the process, we will recover the coefficients found above. This will be done by a standard
computation of Chern classes. (Much of what is needed below can be found in chapter
four of [13].) We recall that the elliptic four-fold N with section can be described by
a Weierstrass equation, which in terms of homogeneous coordinates X, Y, Z reads s = 0
where
s = ZY 2 − X 3 + aXZ 2 − bZ 3 .

(2.5)

One can think of X, Y, and Z as homogeneous coordinates on a P2 bundle W → B. On
the total space of this bundle is a line bundle that we will call O(1) (whose sections, when
restricted to any P2 fiber of W , are functions of X, Y, Z homogeneous of degree one). Z is
a section of O(1), X is a section of O(1) ⊗ K −2 , and Y is a section of O(1) ⊗ K −3 , where
K is the canonical bundle of B, pulled back to N . (a and b are sections of K −4 and K −6 .)
We write the total Chern class of B as
C = 1 + c1 + c2 + c3

(2.6)

where in particular c1 = −c1 (K), and we set α = c1 (O(1)). The cohomology ring of W is
generated, over the cohomology ring of B, by the element α with the relation
α(α + 2c1 )(α + 3c1 ) = 0.

(2.7)

This relation expresses the fact that the homogeneous coordinates Z, X, and Y have the
following two properties: (i) they are sections respectively of the line bundles O(1), O(1) ⊗
K −2 , and O(1) ⊗ K −3 , whose first Chern classes are α, α + 2c1 , and α + 3c1 ; (ii) they have
no common zeroes, so that the product of these first Chern classes vanishes.
The relation (2.7) holds in the cohomology ring of W . Our Calabi-Yau four-fold N is
defined by the equation s = 0 where s, defined in (2.5), is a section of O(1)3 ⊗ K −6 , which
is a line bundle whose first Chern class is 3α + 6c1 = 3(α + 2c1 ). Any cohomology class
on N that can be extended over W (and this includes all those that we will require) can
be integrated over N by multiplying it by 3(α + 2c1 ) and then integrating over W . Since
we are in that sense planning to multiply by α + 2c1 , the relation (2.7), in the cohomology
ring of N , can be simplified to
α(α + 3c1 ) = 0.

(2.8)

Now we wish to compute the Euler characteristic of N , or equivalently its fourth
Chern class. To do this we use the adjunction formula, which says that the total Chern
6

class of the projective space bundle W is C · (1 + α)(1 + α + 2c1 )(1 + α + 3c1 ), while the
total Chern class C of N is obtained by dividing this by (1 + 3α + 6c1 ), and is therefore
C = (1 + c1 + c2 + c3 )

(1 + α)(1 + α + 2c1 )(1 + α + 3c1 )
.
(1 + 3α + 6c1 )

(2.9)

The fourth Chern class of N , which we will call c4 , is simply the quartic term in the
expansion of (2.9). To compute it, we simply expand C, dropping terms such as c41 or c21 c2 ,
which vanish because B is only three-dimensional, and setting α2 = −3αc1 according to
(2.8). The result is
c4 = 4αc1 (c2 + 30c21 ).

(2.10)

Z

(2.11)

The Euler characteristic of N is
χ=

c̄4 .

N

Integration over N can be accomplished by first integrating over the fibers of N → B, and
then integrating over B. In the first step, one uses the fact that if F is a generic fiber, then
R
α = 3. The “3” reflects the fact that the equation s = 0 is cubic in the homogenous
F

coordinates X, Y, Z, so that the equation Z = 0 (which is dual to the cohomology class α)
defines three points on F . So we get
χ = 12

Z

c1 (c2 + 30c21 ).

(2.12)

B

Setting I = χ/24, this is equivalent to the result stated earlier in (2.3).
Before leaving this subject, let us note that the existence of a formula of this sort
reflects the fact that on a D-brane world-volume, gravitational and gauge fields induce
lower D-brane charges [14,15]. In particular, it was shown in [14,15] that if a p-brane
world-volume K has a non-zero first Pontryagin class p1 , there is an induced p − 4-brane
1
p1 (K); if K is a complex manifold this is the same as c2 (K)/24. In the
charge given by 48

case at hand, the seven-brane world-volume is given by R4 × K where K (the discriminant
of N → B) is a complex surface in B whose cohomology class is 12c1 . The induced 3R
brane charge is thus roughly B (12c1 )(c2 (K)/24). One can then, roughly, express c2 (K) as

a linear combination of c1 (B)2 and c2 (B), obtaining for χ a formula along the lines above.

The difficulty in making this approach precise is that for any elliptic four-fold N of SU (4)
holonomy, B has singularities (corresponding to points at which the fiber of N → B has
a cusp, that is points at which a = b = 0 in (2.5)), and care is required to determine the
7

contribution of these singularities to the three-brane charge. The approach we gave above,
in which everything is referred to the P2 bundle W , sidesteps such issues.
The above computation of the Euler characteristic is valid precisely for elliptic fourfolds with (i) a section, and (ii) a smooth Weierstrass model. If either condition is relaxed,
the formula does not hold. In particular, to analyze compactifications of F -theory with
generic non-trivial unbroken gauge groups, one would like to understand what happens for
elliptic four-folds with a section whose Weierstrass model is not smooth. We will not try
to analyze that case.
2.3. Examples with χ < 0.
We have already given examples in which tadpole cancellation fails because I is not
integral. We here wish to examine the other possible obstruction, which is that I might
be negative.
Constructing examples of Calabi-Yau four-folds with χ < 0 is difficult, essentially
because h2,1 , which is the only non-vanishing Hodge number contributing to χ with a
negative sign, is usually small in simple examples. We wonder whether some of the usual
constructions of Calabi-Yau’s as complete intersections in projective spaces or even in more
general toric varieties may always give examples with χ > 0.
If one is willing to consider more general conformal field theories such as orbifolds with
discrete torsion ([16]; see [17] for a recent discussion and geometrical interpretation of some
examples), then it is not difficult, at least in the context of Type IIA compactification from
ten to two dimensions, to find examples for which the number I of branes needed to cancel
the tadpole is negative. These are thus superficially reasonable Type IIA compactifications
in which supersymmetry is spoiled by the wrong sign of the tadpole. It is plausible that
these examples also have analogs in M-theory and F-theory.
We will consider a simple example for illustration. This example has a non-zero h2,0 ,
and so gives N = 4 supersymmetry in d = 2.1
The example is a toroidal orbifold, the target space being T8 /Z2 ×Z2 . We describe T8
via four complex coordinates zi . The generator, α, of the first Z2 acts on the coordinates
by, zi → −zi , for i = 1, 2. The generator for the second Z2 , denoted β, acts similarly
1

As is customary, we define the Hodge numbers hp,q of a two-dimensional N = 2 supercon-

formal field theory in terms of the number of Ramond ground states with given U (1)L × U (1)R
quantum numbers.

8

on the coordinates z3 , z4 . Without discrete torsion, this model is just K3 × K3 at a
point in its moduli space with orbifold symmetry. With discrete torsion, the situation
changes. In this model, the choice of a non-trivial discrete torsion is unique. Specifying
the phase, ǫ(α, β) = −1, for a genus one path integral with α and β twists, determines
the weights for all other path integral sectors. Let us compute the Hodge diamond with
this discrete torsion. The contribution from the untwisted sector is unchanged from the
standard orbifold computation, and is given by,
1
0

2

0
1


0 2 0
8 0 8
0 20 0
8 0 8
0 2 0


1
0

2,

0
1

where the (p, q) entry is hp,q . The contribution from the three twisted sectors is more
interesting. Let us consider the sector twisted by the element αβ in the quotient group.
The fixed point set consists of 44 points, which, without discrete torsion, would contribute
44 to h2,2 . The shift of the (p, q) charges in a twisted sector is described in [18]. Because
ǫ(α, αβ) = ǫ(β, αβ) = −1, the fixed points are no longer invariant under the action of the
quotient group, and are projected out; hence there is no contribution from this sector. The
remaining two fixed point sectors give equal contributions, so we need only consider the
sector twisted by α. The fixed point set is 16 copies of T4 . Because of the discrete torsion,
the only operators which survive projection have (unshifted) charges given by,



0 32 0
 32 0 32  .
0 32 0
The total contribution from twisted and untwisted sectors gives a Hodge diamond,
1
0

2

0
1


0 2 0
8 64 8
64 20 64
8 64 8
0 2 0


1
0

2.

0
1

For this space, χ is −8(24), so we require 8 anti-branes to cancel the tadpole. Because χ
is negative, this results in supersymmetry breaking.
9

2.4. F-Theory on K3 × K3
There are several ways to obtain N = 2 supersymmetry in four dimensions from
F-theory. One possibility is F-theory compactification on the product of a Calabi-Yau
three-fold C with a two-torus. If C is elliptically fibered over a base B, there are two
apparently distinct (but equivalent under further compactification) versions of F-theory
on C × T2 : one can consider Type IIB on C itself or on B × T2 . We will be interested in
the latter case. Another N = 2 model in four dimensions is F-theory on K3 × K3 where
one of the K3’s is elliptic (the latter compactification has been considered in [19]). It is
natural to ask if the two theories can be dual to one another. We will now see that with
a proper choice of three-fold C, this is indeed the case. In the analysis we will see that in
this special case, the branes we have encountered in this paper are related to more familiar
things, and we will get a check on the proportionality constant in the formula I = χ/24.
One starts from the duality of F-theory on K3 to heterotic strings on T2 . By compactifying both sides on a K3 down to four dimensions, we get a duality between F-theory on
K3 × K3 with heterotic strings on K3 × T2 . We consider the case where we do not excite a
gauge bundle over the K3 on the heterotic side, but cancel the heterotic world-sheet anomaly by turning on 24 five-branes (wrapped around T 2 ) [20]. The eight dimensional duality
between F-theory and heterotic strings implies that we need to turn on 24 three-branes
on the F-theory side. This is, of course, in agreement with the fact that for a K3 × K3
compactification, we have I = χ/24 = 24. On the other hand, we can look at K3 × T2
compactification of the heterotic string in another way: we fiber the eight-dimensional
duality between the heterotic string on T2 and F-theory on K3, to obtain six-dimensional
duality between heterotic strings on K3 and F-theory on a certain Calabi-Yau three-fold
[12]. This duality can be extended to the case where the heterotic string has trivial gauge
bundle (and 24 fivebranes) by an appropriate number of blowups on the F-theory side [21].
A description of the resulting Calabi-Yau three-fold C, which has (h11 , h21 ) = (43, 43)
has been given in [22]. We then compactify this further on a T2 to four dimensions. On
the heterotic side of course we have the same compactification as above; we have simply
exchanged the 9-10 coordinate with 5-6 coordinate. On the F-theory side, this geometric
symmetry of the heterotic string translates to a duality between F-theory on C × T2 –
with this particular C – and F-theory on K3 × K3.
10

3. Non-Perturbative Superpotential
In this paper we have been analyzing compactifications of F-theory to four dimensions
(or related compactifications of Type IIA superstring theory or M-theory to two or three
dimensions) on a Calabi-Yau four-fold N . In the limit that N has large radius, this gives
a four-dimensional vacuum with N = 1 supersymmetry. Many of these models, however,
generate non-perturbative superpotentials – exponentially small in the large radius limit
– because of instantons that arise from five-brane wrapping [23]. This occurs when the
F -theory base B has a divisor Q with certain properties; it suffices to have H i,0 (Q) = 0,
i = 1, 2, and H 0 (Q, NQ ) = 0, NQ being the normal bundle to Q in B. We wish in this
concluding section to briefly consider a few issues involving the relation of these nonperturbative superpotentials to the branes that have been our main interest in this paper.
First of all, we note a rather surprising fact about the non-perturbative superpotentials. Given any F -theory base B that does not have a divisor that can generate a superpotential, we can create a complex manifold B ′ that does have such a divisor by blowing
up a point P ∈ B; we simply let Q be the “exceptional divisor” created in the blow-up. If
there is a Calabi-Yau four-fold N ′ over B ′ that can be used in F-theory compactification,
then in compactification on N ′ there will be a non-perturbative superpotential.
Now, by analogy with what happens for F-theory compactification to six dimensions
[12,24], one might expect that phase transitions, perhaps of an exotic nature, would occur
between F-theory on N → B and F-theory on N ′ → B ′ . The superpotential, however,
may be identically zero for F-theory on N , while it is definitely non-zero for F-theory
on N ′ . Although there does not quite seem to be a contradiction in the fact that there
is a superpotential in N ′ and none on N , we do find it challenging to try to reconcile
this fact with the expectation that a physical transition from compactification on N to
compactification on N ′ is possible.
We will not meet this challenge here, but point out one fact which must be part of
the story. The number of branes in compactification on N ′ is not the same as that in
compactification on N . In fact, if B ′ is obtained from B by blow-up of a point, then
R
R
c (B ′ )3 − B c1 (B)3 = −8. Thus there are 8 · 15 = 120 fewer branes if the base is B ′
B′ 1

than if it is B. Presumably the interpretation is that a point P ∈ B can be blown up

only if 120 branes simultaneously arrive at P and annihilate. There is no surprise per se
in the fact that some parameters must be adjusted to make blow-up of a point in the base
possible; this is also so in F-theory compactification to six dimensions [12,24], where the
11

relevant parameters are complex structure modes of the elliptic three-fold that is fibered
over B. The novelty is merely that among the parameters that must be so adjusted are
the positions of branes.
Another obvious question raised by the presence of branes in these vacua is how the
non-perturbative superpotential depends on the brane positions. We note that the nonperturbative superpotential generated by an instanton associated with a divisor Q should
be expected to get no zero or pole from the motion of branes in the vacuum as long as
those remain disjoint from Q. However, a singular behavior as one of the vacuum branes
approaches Q might be expected, and would be well worth analyzing.
We would like to thank A. Klemm for valuable discussions. The research of SS and CV
was supported in part by NSF grant PHY-92-18167. The research of EW was supported
in part by NSF grant PHY-9513835.

12

References
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]
[16]
[17]
[18]
[19]
[20]
[21]
[22]
[23]
[24]

C. Vafa, “Evidence For F Theory”, hep-th/9602022.
E. Witten, Mod. Phys. Lett. A10 (1995) 2153.
C. Vafa and E. Witten, Nucl. Phys. B447 (1995) 261.
M. Duff, J. Liu, and R. Minasian, Nucl. Phys. B452 (1995) 261.
P. K. Townsend, Phys. Lett. B350 (1995) 184.
E. Witten, Nucl. Phys. B443 (1995) 85.
K. Becker and M. Becker, “M-Theory on Eight-Manifolds”, hep-th/9605053.
A. A. Tseytlin, “Self-Duality of Born-Infeld Action and Dirichlet 3-Brane of Type IIB
Superstring Theory”, hep-th/9602064.
D. P. Jatkar and S. K. Rama, “F Theory From Dirichlet Three-Branes”, hepth/9606009.
E. Witten, “Five-Branes And M -Theory On An Orbifold,” Nucl. Phys. B463 (1996)
383.
A. Sen, “Duality and Orbifolds”, hep-th/9604070.
D. Morrison and C. Vafa, “Compactifications of F Theory on Calabi-Yau Threefolds.
I,II”, hep-th/9602114, hep-th/9603161.
R. Bott and L. W. Tu, Differential Forms In Algebraic Topology (Springer-Verlag,
1982).
M. Bershadsky, V. Sadov and C. Vafa, Nucl. Phys. B463 (1996) 398.
M. Green, J. Harvey and G. Moore, “I-Brane Inflow and Anomalous Couplings on
D-branes”, hep-th/9605033.
C. Vafa, Nucl. Phys. B273 (1986) 592.
C. Vafa and E. Witten, J. Geom. Phys. 15 (1995) 189.
E. Zaslow, Comm. Math. Phys. 156 (1993) 301.
M. Douglas and M. Li, “D-brane Realization of Super Yang-Mills Theory in FourDimensions”, hep-th/9604041.
M.J. Duff, R. Minasian and E. Witten, “Evidence for Heterotic/Heterotic Duality”,
hep-th/9601036.
N. Seiberg and E. Witten, “Comments on String Dynamics in Six-Dimensions”, hepth/9603003.
P. Candelas and A. Font, “Duality Between the Webs of Heterotic and Type II Vacua”,
hep-th/9603170.
E. Witten, “Nonperturbative Superpotentials in String Theory”, hep-th/9604030.
E. Witten, “Phase Transitions In M-Theory And F-Theory,” hep-th/9603150.

13

